Media release Friday 6 December 2024
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese The Hon Anthony Albanese MP Prime Minister of Australia
Senator the Hon Don Farrell Minister for Trade and Tourism Special Minister of State
The Hon Madeleine King MP Minister for Resources Minister for Northern Australia
The   Albanese Labor Government is delivering vital support to Australia's   critical minerals sector by providing up to $475 million in additional   finance to develop the Eneabba Rare Earths Refinery project in Western   Australia.
This project is Australia's first integrated rare   earths refinery and will support 900 jobs at its peak during   construction, and an additional 250 secure, well-paid jobs once   operational.
This investment will boost global rare earths supply   chain resilience, while unlocking Australian deposits of key critical   minerals which are essential in a range of defence and renewable energy   technologies like electric vehicles, wind turbines and mobile phones.
Australian   company Iluka Resources is delivering the project which ensures more   value is captured onshore, and more Australians benefit from our unique   minerals endowment.
This additional support reinforces Australia's   commitment to supporting secure and sustainable critical minerals   supply chains, making us an indispensable part of the global net-zero   economy.
The Government's support ensures Iluka will deliver   additional outcomes to maximise project benefits in Australia's national   interest including additional commitments from Iluka to diversify   supply chains and deliver broader community benefits aligned with the   new Future Made in Australia Act.
The support will be provided by   Export Finance Australia (EFA) through the Government's $4 billion   Critical Minerals Facility (CMF).
Australia's rare earths refining   sector will also benefit from the Critical Minerals Production Tax   Incentive which will provide a tax offset for eligible critical minerals   processing costs.
The Albanese Government's commitment to a   Future Made in Australia is all about seizing the vast economic and   industrial opportunities from the global net zero transformation and   strengthening our economic resilience.
"Critical   minerals are the building blocks for a clean energy future and we are   determined to seize this economic opportunity to support local   businesses and local jobs.
"A strong resources sector means a healthy economy and good, well paid local jobs.
"We will back WA's resources sector, through our plan for a Future Made in Australia and our Production Tax Credits."
"Our   Government is committed to becoming a renewable energy superpower, not   just to tackle the global challenge of climate change but also to   harness the opportunity to create significant high paying, secure jobs   for Australians.
"Our country is blessed with an abundance of   critical minerals and the Albanese Labor Government wants Australians to   benefit from this emerging sector."
"Supporting   our critical minerals and rare earths industry is about Australia   taking responsibility to lead on critical minerals globally.
"Not   only are critical minerals and rare earths key to the energy transition,   they are essential to the defence industry and our national security.
"We   stand at an important moment in time where the world wants what we have   and we just happen to have the most advanced mining sector in the   world."


