Mandate Secretary in Health and Environment, Federal Capital Territory, and a former General Manager of the Lagos State Environmental Protection Agency, Dr Adedolapo Fasawe, speaks to LARA ADEJORO on efforts of the FCT towards enhancing health and the environment in the territory
Can you give us an overview of the mandate and core responsibilities of the FCT, Health and Environmental Secretariat, particularly with the rapidly growing urban dynamics of the FCT?
The secretariat used to be called the Health and Human Services Secretariat. This is the Pioneer Environment Secretariat. I am the first mandate secretary they would ever have for the environment, and I’m happy that I didn’t have to split myself into two.
I hold two portfolios, one as a medical doctor, and one as an environmentalist. First of all, we have to agree that there’s a nexus between health and the environment; so, we don’t have to split into two. Your environment is your health. The environment where you live, eat, walk, and play is directly proportional to your quality of health.
So, my mandate is to ensure that there’s a balance in the system for health and the environment. Abuja is a rapidly urbanising city and with urbanisation comes problems. One of the problems is we have to expand to accommodate foreign investors.
Within health, we should not only think of infrastructural development, we should think of human resources for health. We should think of adequate staff, the right equipment, and the best practices. I’m happy to say that as of today, the accredited hospitals for Medical Residency Training are Asokoro District Hospital, Maitama District Hospital, Wuse District Hospital, Kubwa General Hospital, and Karu General Hospital.
One of the things that we say here is that we have zero tolerance for maternal mortality. There’s no reason why any woman should die of childbirth complications. There’s no reason why any woman should die. For a woman who has received antenatal care, there’s no reason for her to have complications and die or the child dies at birth. There are some situations where nothing, even in the best centres, can happen.
For example, in the FCT, Mr Nyesom Wike has declared that health insurance is free for every pregnant woman. Not only is it free for the child they will deliver for the first year of their life, it will have free access to care.
Given the interconnectivity of health and environment, how do you ensure that your approach integrates these two areas effectively in the secretariat’s strategic planning and execution?
I am delighted to inform you that we are adopting the One Health concept which is the approach recommended by the World Health Organisation at the community level, sub-national, national, regional, and global levels.
After working in the medical field as a public health physician, even though I was quite adventurous, I loved clinical medicine; I used to volunteer my time to work in general hospitals. We had programmes like free limb deformity corrective surgeries, where I would be an assistant surgeon to the consulting surgeons.
We had free cleft palate operations where we repaired cleft palates, and I learned how to repair a cleft palate. We had medical missions where we do appendectomies, where we do cesarean sections, where we remove lumps. I wanted to keep being active in clinical medicine.
Even as a public health physician who is to make policies, I made policies that ensured that I kept my hands with the tools of medicine actively for 20 years. I’m happy to say that up till today, just recently in Asokoro General Hospital, I took delivery unaided of two beautiful babies. One was named after Barrister Wike on Workers’ Day. I felt well, we were short-staffed, and I went to help in the hospitals.
So, at the hospital, I saw what the problem was; I felt that the vaginal introitus was tight for the baby to come out. The baby has started caputing. I gave her a good episiotomy and brought the baby out. In the course of my work in policy-making, I also want to feel what the patient is feeling. I also want to know what the other side is like. That is why I engulfed myself in clinical medicine even as a policymaker, because we sit in our offices and write about health insurance and all sorts of things.
We need to know if the target population is getting these things and if they are being treated. So that we can make better policies. When I reached the peak of my career in health as a grade level 17 officer, I became interested in the environment. I started reading about global warming and climate change, and what did it for me was during the COVID-19 pandemic. The nexus between health and the environment was so clear.
Statistically, it was obvious that your environment determined your mortality or morbidity. Those who lived in crowded, dirty environments were more susceptible to dying from COVID-19 than those who lived in neat environments, apart from the fact that people had underlying diseases.
What are some of the initiatives the Secretariat has implemented to improve health outcomes for women and children?
There’s free health insurance for all pregnant women but with conditions. They must attend their antenatal care, and they must deliver in a skilled birth attendant centre. It doesn’t necessarily have to be a doctor because we are constantly training our health workers.
There’s an emergency in human resources for health. So, we are training nurses, we are training community health workers to do some of these simple works, but with standard operating protocol and strict supervision and monitoring, so that every pregnant woman will deliver in a sterile, scientifically-approved situation.
That is why we give birthing kits to every pregnant woman who is insured with us. At the time of delivery, everything you need for delivery has been sterilised and is in a kit set aside for them. In the FCT, we have funders.
We have free antimalarials for any child under five. In any of our centres, a child who has malaria and is under five should not pay, and this is due to global partners. There’s a current programme going on called Impact.
Vaccination is important because there are killer diseases that affect children, if they are not vaccinated against it. Polio has been eradicated in Nigeria because every child (9:07) born gets the oral polio vaccine.
Then, the Penta 3 immunisation for every child is free. At nine months, they get measles vaccination. All these things were killer diseases before. But right now, with good immunisation and support from the government, these diseases are becoming rarer.
There’s a rise of Non-Communicable Diseases in the country, including the FCT. What’s the secretariat doing to tackle the rise?
We have now come together to see that there’s a sudden increase in NCDs; they are not diseases that you can contract, like HIV, typhoid fever, cholera, or Lassa fever.  These are diseases that come on their own, they’re non-communicable. The most troublesome of these are hypertension, diabetes, and cancer are on the increase.
In the FCT, we’ve been engaging in education. We had a recent outreach, a national outreach project of 10 million, where all the Commissioners for Health in Nigeria plus the FCT decided to carry out free tests for hypertension and diabetes because we noticed the trend that younger people were starting to have hypertension, and people were suddenly dying.
The issue of sudden death due to heart attack and heart disease, which is a complication of hypertension, suddenly became on the rise, and you see young people slump and die. The most painful part is, you see healthy people who exercise and eat right, and they say, he just finished at the gym and he slumped and died.
People need to know their numbers. Knowing your numbers means knowing your blood pressure, knowing your blood sugar, and you control them. It is only your doctor that can tell you how to control them. It is not necessarily with medication. It could be your lifestyle, and during this current programme, in one of the areas in the FCT, up to 75 per cent of people seen that had high blood pressure had never heard of High Blood Pressure.
The country is focusing a lot on cancer now. The Federal Government, for the first time, has put up the National Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment, and the FCT is also one of the few cities in the world that is working with the Clinton Foundation on the early detection of cancer. The FCT is one of the benefitting cities in the City Cancer Challenge.
Do you have some digital health solutions you’re using to improve public health delivery in the FCT?
For the first time, we are piloting telemedicine. We are working with a company called Mobihealth. Mobihealth is an integrated telehealth company leveraging technology to improve access to healthcare in a timely and affordable manner through mobile phones, computers, and solar-powered walk-in telehealth clinics. This helps to boost the shortage of doctors, especially in rural hard-to-reach areas.
Telemedicine means that you can download an app for free and see a doctor from the comfort of your home or your office. All you need to do is know your numbers. The doctors will tell you which tests to do and where. He will get the results and he can prescribe for you and your medicine is waiting for you at the next pharmacy, we have started. That is the beauty of telemedicine, it is artificial intelligence. It is using AI, and big data analytics to solve medical problems.
When we came in, it was surprising to see that patients were asked to buy gloves, plasters, syringes needles, and fluid-giving sets. I had to walk into the hospital for three days to understand how that was. Now, it is banned in any of our hospitals for a patient to have a prescription to include medical consumables.
The FCT, like many major cities, faces significant environmental challenges such as pollution, waste management, and deforestation. What steps is the Secretariat taking to address these issues while also promoting sustainable urbanisation?
Recently, a lot of advocacy programmes have been going on at the community level. We have an agency called Parks and Recreation, we work closely with the agency, and the Abuja Metropolitan Management Council to ensure that we start to create an awareness about the environment.
For example, we are in partnership with Parks and Gardens. We have environment champions in most secondary schools in Abuja, and what we do is teach them about global warming, and climate change. The FCT is not an industrial city, so pollution from industries is quite not a problem, but we are facing desertification, and desertification is due to urbanisation and migration.
Ten years ago, we didn’t see cows on the streets trying to find food to eat, but the forest is gradually receding, and cows are coming on the streets to find food to eat. We are starting to encourage tree planting in partnership with international organisations. For example, we just planted 248 trees on Independence Avenue.
Talking about recycling in the communities, there is the Abuja Environmental Protection Board, which is doing a great job of keeping the city clean. We are also preaching recycling and effective waste management.
Are there any ongoing or upcoming infrastructure projects aimed at enhancing environmental and health outcomes in the FCT, particularly in underserved communities?
The FCT minister is called Mr Projects. He has recently directed that we start to look into all abandoned projects regarding hospitals in the FCT, and then make a status report. We in the secretariat are trying to start to compound medications and have compounding rooms in our general hospitals.
We have had support from global funders to equip existing PHCs. The truth is with Abuja, we do not want to keep building healthcare centres until we get all existing healthcare centres to optimum, efficient, and functional levels with human resources and equipment.
But the hospitals we’re commissioning, renovating, constructing, and we’re still working on doctors’ call rooms infrastructure. And I am happy to inform you that we have also been accredited to take more house officers in the FCT.
Looking ahead, what are your key priorities for the next three years in terms of health and environmental sustainability in the FCT?
One, improving access to health care for all, and prioritising health promotion. Health promotion is simply a lifestyle of knowledge, understanding, and how to live a life. In addition, early detection leads to better prognosis. I would like more patients to enroll in the health insurance scheme because it saves lives.
As a leader in the health and environmental sectors, what has been the most rewarding aspect of your work in the FCT, and what advice would you give to other cities striving to balance health, environment, and urban growth?
As a leader in both the health and environment sectors, it is quite rewarding to see me being invited to global warming and climate change conferences. At the same time, I was actively asked to talk about the nexus between global warming and climate change at health conferences. Now, I am happy to say there is a climate change desk in the FCT.
My most rewarding, happy moment is that apart from calling me from health and environment, I am one of the few renowned experts who have found the nexus between health and environment in West Africa, so that makes me happy. Now we have a climate change desk in our health ministry and I hope all other states will, too.