Religious leaders from various faiths called on Monday for collaboration among relevant stakeholders to address the challenges of climate change and its environmental impact.
They also pledged support for transitioning from fossil fuels to clean energy sources to combat global warming.
The leaders made their commitment at a conference held in Abuja, the nation’s capital.
Themed “Multi-faith National Dialogue on Medium and Long-term Climate Goals,” the conference was organised by GreenFaith Nigeria, a non-governmental organisation bringing together Christians, Muslims, followers of traditional African beliefs, Hindus, and others for climate justice.
In his address, the Chief Imam of the Al-Habibiyyah Islamic Society, Abuja, Faud Adeyemi, called for synergy among interfaith leaders in combating climate change in the country.
Represented by the Director at Al-Habibiyyah Islamic Society, Ibrahim Idris, Adeyemi described environmental degradation as unacceptable, stressing that faith leaders must make their voices heard, loud and clear.
“I challenge you to return to your communities with renewed purpose. Educate, advocate, and lead by example. Together, let us be the voice of change, guiding Nigeria towards an equitable, just, and sustainable future for all.
“Faith leaders have always held a unique position of influence in Nigerian society. We are trusted voices, often serving as pillars of strength and guidance in our communities. This places a profound responsibility upon us to not only raise awareness but to lead the way in advocating for a transition to a clean energy future that leaves no one behind,” he said.
Also speaking, the Executive Director of the Kukah Centre, Abuja, Rev Fr Atta Barkindo, urged participants not to limit conversations on climate change to the oil-producing regions alone.
He decried the depth of environmental destruction in the North, stressing that the time for action to reverse this trend has come.
“We must not restrict the conversation to just the Niger Delta. Travel from Maiduguri to Damaturu and down to Chad, and you will see the severe degradation. You will see carcasses of camels and cows that have died due to lack of water. In some places in the North-East, even digging a borehole will not produce water.
“The impact of this extractive industry is not limited to the physical environment but extends to the social environment. We have witnessed the displacement of communities as people compete for limited resources.
“Since oil was discovered in Nigeria in the 1950s, the country has relied on fossil fuels and neglected other sectors, from farming to animal husbandry, without investing in infrastructure and hospitals. That was why former Head of State Yakubu Gowon said the problem is not money but how to spend it. Our once fertile land now bears the scars of oil exploration, with poisoned water and darkened skies. Communities are torn apart by environmental degradation,” he said.
Speaking on the rationale for the conference, Global Programme Director of GreenFaith, Meryne Warah, stated that the gathering was about using the power of the collective to champion positive change.
Represented by the Programme Manager, GreenFaith Africa, Pius Oko, Warah said, “We must remember the power of our collective faith to inspire change, advocate for the vulnerable, and guide our leaders in this critical time. Today, we are not only envisioning a better future but are committed to taking bold steps to bring that vision to life.”