Nearly 40% of displacements driven by natural disasters in 2023 occurred in countries highly vulnerable to climate change but ill-equipped to respond, according to new analysis by UNFPA, the UN's sexual and reproductive health agency.
The analysis by UNFPA of data from the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center, a leading source of global data and analysis on internal displacement, examined more than 26 million internal displacements linked to nearly 4,000 disaster displacement events in 2023 and then broke down the data by gender for each disaster.
Climate change is leading to a cycle of extreme heat and destructive weather events. The analysis highlights how increasingly frequent weather-related disasters are impacting countries already facing ongoing humanitarian crises and extreme poverty. Rich nations are not spared:
Climate change, particularly extreme heat, poses significant health risks for women and girls. This includes increased risks of stillbirth, malnutrition, gender-based violence, and exposure to heat stress and infectious diseases. Climate change also threatens gender equality and sustainable development. Weather-related disasters fueled by climate change exacerbate inequality, disrupt essential health services, and limit women and girls' access to education and livelihoods.
"The climate crisis is making the world more dangerous for everyone, and in countries hardest hit, it is women and girls who suffer most," said Dr. Natalia Kanem. "As storms, floods, droughts and wildfires displace them from their homes, life-saving health services, safe spaces, education and livelihood opportunities can fall out of reach. Women and girls are on the frontlines of the climate emergency, and this new analysis is a reminder that their needs must not be ignored."
The UNFPA analysis of IDMC data shows that 13.1 million of a total 26.4 million displacement incidents involved women and girls, including those who were displaced multiple times due to natural disasters. More than half of these displacements took place in China, Türkiye, the Philippines, Somalia and Bangladesh.
Nearly three quarters of all displacements were due to storms and floods. Not all weather-related disasters are the result of climate change, but it is making some extreme weather events more frequent and intense.
At COP 29 in Baku, Azerbaijan, UNFPA is calling for greater climate action focusing on women, girls and young people:
"Without urgent measures, climate change will set back the clock even further on achieving gender equality and sustainable development. The time is now to put the rights, health and well-being of women and girls at the heart of climate action,"' said Dr. Kanem.
Provided by
																											UNFPA