Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.
President-elect Donald Trump is ramping up the assembly of his team for a second term in the White House. He says he will nominate former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee to be ambassador to Israel, House Rep. Elise Stefanik to serve as U.N. Ambassador and Rep. Mike Waltz of Florida to be his national security adviser. Trump has also tapped Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy to lead a new government agency called the Department of Government Efficiency. Some of his selections, like TV host Pete Hegseth for secretary of defense, have raised some eyebrows. Here's who else Trump has picked as cabinet members and key advisors so far.
Republican presidential nominee, former U.S. President Donald Trump arrives to speak during an election night event at the Palm Beach Convention Center on Nov. 6, in West Palm Beach, Fla. hide caption
A U.S. jury has awarded $42 million to three former detainees of the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. The abuse they received there by American troops is one of the lasting legacies of the invasion of Iraq. Photos of the abuse were published in 2004. Warning: This story contains graphic descriptions of the torture of the prisoners.
United Kingdom Prime Minister Kier Starmer has announced plans to cut climate pollution by at least 81% compared to 1990 levels by 2035. He made the pledge to fight global warming at the COP29 Climate Summit, which is underway this week.
Money from fossil fuels is directly financing Russia's invasion of Ukraine, a leading climate scientist says. hide caption
Money from fossil fuels is directly financing Russia's invasion of Ukraine, a leading climate scientist says.
Each day this week, Morning Edition will dive deep into one of the promises President-elect Donald Trump has made for day one of his administration.
Trump has promised to boost America's fossil fuel industry. As part of this plan, he intends to eliminate policies and regulations that support green technologies, such as those found in the Inflation Reduction Act. Additionally, he has expressed a desire to lower energy prices and terminate offshore wind projects. Brian Murray, director of the Nicholas Institute for Energy, Environment & Sustainability at Duke University, speaks with NPR's A Martínez about what that would mean for the U.S.' climate goals .
Christian Baiocco, Griffin Katz and Grant Weintrob pose for a film photo with President Joseph Biden. hide caption
The creators behind the viral TikTok account @lifeonfilm.27 give film cameras to strangers all over the world and compile the images into a video. They have even featured celebrities such as Ed Sheeran and Ice Spice. In September, one of the most powerful men in the world, President Biden, was given a camera. The resulting photos offer a glimpse into his life, showcasing views of the White House taken from the presidential limo, as well as newly signed bills and other documents in the Oval Office.
Nicholas Hamlett, 45, was the subject of a weekslong manhunt following the Oct. 18 murder of Steven Lloyd. Authorities say Hamlett befriended Lloyd and lured him into a wooded area in Tennessee, killing him in an attempted identity theft plot. hide caption
This newsletter was edited by Suzanne Nuyen .