TIME magazine has named the Chief Executive Officer of Sustainable Energy for All and Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General, Damilola Ogunbiyi, among its TIME100 Climate list of influential leaders pushing climate action forward.
The magazine’s latest list highlights the 100 most innovative global figures working to accelerate climate-conscious business solutions.
According to a statement, TIME recognised Ogunbiyi as a prominent advocate for sustainable energy dedicated to a fair and inclusive energy transition, especially for the Global South.
The magazine pointed to her working as CEO of SEforALL to promote climate action that prioritises decarbonisation and advocates for the needs of developing regions.
The Chair of SEforALL’s Governance Board, Francesco Starace, praised Ogunbiyi’s impact, stating, “Sustainable energy is a key solution if we are to tackle the climate crisis and usher in a greener, brighter future.
“Damilola has been an impactful leader, demonstrating that change can happen in record time if there is dedication and focus. As a Governance Board, we congratulate her on this well-deserved recognition.”
Ogunbiyi responded to the TIME100 honour, sharing that the recognition reflects the commitment of her team and supporters worldwide.
She stated, “This is not just a recognition of my work and my amazing colleagues at SEforALL, but of the entire team of people that have supported the vision of accelerating action on climate change and energy poverty – focused on not leaving anyone behind.”
The TIME recognition is the most recent accolade Ogunbiyi has received following her job at SEforAll, it added.
In September 2024, the SEforAll CEO received the UAE’s First Class Order of Zayed II for her contributions to COP28, and she was also awarded the Global Female Leadership Impact Award.
Earlier in March 2024, Reuters recognised her as a pioneer among women in climate and energy.
She also received the Energy Institute President’s Award last year.
SEforALL hailed Ogunbiyi noting that since her appointment in 2020, the agency has expanded its support to over 90 countries and helped secure more than $1.3tn in energy financing.
Through her leadership, SEforALL has grown as a force working to ensure that all communities, particularly those in emerging economies, benefit from a sustainable and equitable energy transition, it added.
