
US Department of State
Media Note Office of the Spokesperson November 26, 2024
The text of the following statement was released by the G7   Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United   Kingdom and the United States of America and the High Representative of   the European Union.
Begin Text:
I. INTRODUCTION
We, the G7 Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy,   Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States of America and the High   Representative of the European Union, reiterate our commitment to foster   respect for international law, including the Charter of the United   Nations, to protect human rights and dignity for all individuals and to   promote gender equality.
As the international community is facing a growing number of   challenges, including climate change and biodiversity loss, disaster   risks, the eradication of hunger and poverty, emerging and disruptive   technologies, we renew our determination to foster collective action in   the pursuit of common solutions.
Following the adoption of the Pact for the Future and its Annexes   last September, we will work towards its implementation with all UN   Member States and relevant stakeholders, through dialogue and mutual   understanding. We reaffirm our commitment to work with all UN member   states to strengthen the roles of the UNSG as well as the UNGA. We also   recommit to the reform of the UNSC.
Today, we reiterate our determination to further strengthen G7 unity   and sense of common purpose, building on commitments taken by leaders at   the Apulia G7 Summit and at our previous Foreign Ministers' meetings.
II. STEADFAST SUPPORT FOR UKRAINE
On 19th of November 2024, 1000 days have passed since Russia started   its illegal, unjustifiable and unprovoked full-scale invasion of   Ukraine, causing immense human suffering and destruction. We stand firm   against Russia's war of aggression. We vehemently condemn the brutal   attacks against Ukraine's cities and critical civilian infrastructure   and its unacceptable toll on the civilian population. Russia's use of an   intermediate range ballistic missile on 21 November is further evidence   of its reckless and escalatory behaviour. Our support for Ukraine's   territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence will remain   unwavering.
In the G7+ Ministerial Meeting on Ukraine Energy Sector Support on   the margins of the 79th Session of the UN General Assembly we committed   to continue to give immediate priority to Ukraine's early recovery and   energy resilience for this winter season, protecting and restoring the   grid and bolstering generation capacity to protect the livelihoods of   millions of Ukrainians and avoid a further, catastrophic deterioration   of the humanitarian situation.
We condemn Russia's seizure and continued control and militarization   of Ukraine's Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant, which poses severe risks   for nuclear safety and security, with implications for the broader   international community. We support the International Atomic Energy   Agency's efforts directed at mitigating such risks, including through   the continuous presence of IAEA experts and its focus on ensuring   nuclear safety and security at the site.
We condemn the recent increase in Russian attacks on commercial   shipping and civilian port infrastructure in the Black Sea, which   undermines international law, including UNCLOS, puts maritime safety and   security at risk and impacts global food security.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms Russia's irresponsible and   threatening nuclear rhetoric as well as its posture of strategic   intimidation. We will never tolerate threats to use nuclear weapons, let   alone any use of nuclear weapons, by Russia in the context of its war   of aggression against Ukraine. We also express our deepest concern about   the use of chemical weapons as well as riot control agents as a method   of warfare by Russia in Ukraine. As the findings of the report issued   recently by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons   (OPCW) have confirmed the presence of riot control agents in samples   collected from the frontlines in Dnipropetrovsk region in Ukraine, we   emphasize that the use of such weapons as a method of warfare is a   flagrant violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We call on OPCW   to shed full light on the use of these grenades and on other relevant   incidents in the context of Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine.
We also condemn in the strongest terms Russia's widespread and   systematic torture and ill treatment of Ukrainian prisoners of war, and   civilian detainees including the use of sexual violence, as reported by   the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
We welcome the approval by Finance Ministers of the principles and   technical features of the Extraordinary Revenue Acceleration (ERA) Loans   initiative for the benefit of Ukraine, which was announced by G7   Leaders at the Apulia Summit in June. The ERA Loan initiative will   disburse approximately USD 50 billion (EUR 45 billion) for the benefit   of Ukraine. These loans will be serviced and repaid by future flows of   extraordinary revenues stemming from the immobilization of Russian   Sovereign Assets, in line with G7 respective legal systems and   international law. This historic G7 Leaders' decision and its timely   implementation confirm that the G7 remains steadfast in its solidarity   to support Ukraine's fight for freedom, and its recovery and   reconstruction. Russian illegal and unprovoked aggression has caused   untold harm to the people of Ukraine and to global peace and security.   We will not tire in our resolve to give Ukraine the support it needs to   prevail. With the large amount of financing from the ERA loans directed   at Ukraine's pressing budgetary, military and reconstruction need, we   have once again made clear our unwavering commitment to stand by   Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence. Our aim   is to begin disbursing the funds by the end of the year.
We will build on our comprehensive sanctions and economic measures to   further restrict the revenues, goods, and technology Russia uses to   fund and conduct its war.
We will take appropriate measures, consistent with our legal systems,   against actors in China and in other third countries that materially   support Russia's war machine, including financial institutions and other   entities that facilitate Russia's acquisition of equipment and items   for its defense industrial base. We will continue to apply significant   pressure on Russian revenues from energy, metals and other commodities   including through the effective implementation of existing measures and   further actions against the "shadow fleet". We will take robust action   against actors who aid Russia in circumventing our sanctions.
We are seriously concerned about the deployment of the DPRK's troops   to Russia and their use on the battlefield against Ukraine. The DPRK's   direct support for Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine, besides   signaling Russia's desperate efforts to compensate its losses, marks a   dangerous expansion of the conflict, with serious consequences for   European and Indo-Pacific security. We are working with our   international partners for a coordinated response to this development.   We are also deeply concerned about the potential for any transfer of   nuclear or ballistic missiles-related technology to the DPRK in   violation of the relevant UNSC resolutions. We urge countries with ties   to Russia and the DPRK, including China, to uphold international law by   opposing this dangerous expansion of the conflict and implementing all   relevant UNSC resolutions.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms the increasing military   cooperation between DPRK and Russia, including DPRK's export and   Russia's procurement of North Korean ballistic missiles and munitions in   direct violation of relevant UNSC Resolutions, as well as Russia's use   of these missiles and munitions against Ukraine.
We condemn the use of Foreign Information Manipulation and   Interference (FIMI) by the Russian Government and its proxies to support   its war against Ukraine and fuel global tensions. Collectively   responding to FIMI remains central to the G7. Developing a Collective   Response Framework by the end of the year via the G7 Rapid Response   Mechanism (RRM) is a crucial step in that direction, as tasked by the G7   Leaders.
We remain fully committed to contributing to Ukraine's future   reconstruction as a driver for inclusive growth, green transition and   prosperity, while also closely linked to the reform agenda and the   related EU accession path. We look forward to the next Ukraine Recovery   Conference, to be hosted in Rome next 10-11 July 2025. We commend   Ukraine's progress so far and will continue to provide all the necessary   support as it advances on its path towards EU and Euro-Atlantic   integration.
Our ultimate goal remains to reach a comprehensive, just and lasting   peace, capable of restoring full respect for the fundamental principles   of international law, blatantly breached by Russia. We welcome the   Summit on Peace in Ukraine that took place in Switzerland on June 15-16   and its focus on the key priorities needed to achieve a framework for   peace based on international law, including the UN Charter and its   principles, and respect for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial   integrity. We stress that no initiative about Ukraine can be taken   without Ukraine. To that end, we will continue engaging also with global   partners and actors to achieve the widest possible international   support for the key principles and objectives of Ukraine's Peace   Formula, in line with international law including the UN Charter   principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We condemn Russia's unlawful deportation and forcible transfer of   Ukrainian children. We welcome the Montreal Pledge as the outcome of the   Ministerial Conference on the Human Dimension of Ukraine's 10-Point   Peace Formula, co-hosted by Canada, Ukraine and Norway as well as the   offers by Qatar, South Africa and the Holy See to serve as   intermediaries to support and negotiate the return of children; the   continuing role of the United Arab Emirates on mediating the exchanges   of prisoners of war; and the offers by Norway, Lithuania and Qatar to   provide a supportive environment for Ukrainians returning home.
We reiterate our condemnation of the Belarusian regime's complicity   in Russia's war against Ukraine. We express our continued concern over   the regime's continuing repression of independent media, civil society,   political opposition, and citizens peacefully expressing their views. We   also condemn the ill treatment of political prisoners and ask for their   immediate and unconditional release.
III. SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST
We reaffirm our unequivocal condemnation of the terrorist attacks   carried out by Hamas and other terrorist groups against Israel on   October 7, 2023. These atrocities, including the taking of hostages, are   intolerable. We continue to call for the immediate release of all   hostages, and for the remains held by Hamas in Gaza to be returned to   their loved ones. We are deeply concerned by the escalating violence   across the Middle East, which threatens regional stability and shatters   the lives of civilians. An immediate halt to this destructive cycle is   imperative, as no country stands to gain from further escalation in the   region.
Our commitment remains steadfast to the full implementation of UNSC   resolution 2735 (2024) and to the comprehensive agreement advanced by   President Biden in May. This plan would lead to an immediate ceasefire   in Gaza, the release of all hostages, a significant and sustained   increase in the flow of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza, and an   enduring end to the crisis, to secure a pathway to a two-state solution,   with Israel and a sovereign Palestinian state living side by side in   peace and mutual safety. We urge all parties to accept the ceasefire and   call on countries with influence to help reinforce mediation efforts   conducted by the US, Egypt and Qatar.
We are alarmed by the increasing toll of hostilities along the Blue   Line and beyond. We are gravely concerned about the very high number of   civilian casualties, the destruction of critical civilian   infrastructure, including hospitals and health care centers. The growing   number of internally displaced persons in Lebanon is alarming.   Displaced persons on both sides of the Blue Line must be allowed to   return to their homes in safety and security. We remain concerned about   the massive displacement of Lebanese people and Syrian refugees in   Lebanon to Syria and Iraq. We urge the respect of international   humanitarian law in all circumstances.
We support the ongoing negotiation for an immediate ceasefire between   Israel and Hezbollah and the full implementation of UNSC resolution   1701 (2006). Now is the time to conclude a diplomatic settlement and we   welcome efforts deployed in that regard. We emphasize again the role   played by the Lebanese Armed Forces and the UN Interim Force in Lebanon   (UNIFIL), whose posture should be strengthened, in order to fulfill   their respective responsibilities. In this regard, we express deep   concern over the recent attacks and strikes on UNIFIL, which have   injured several peacekeepers and damaged facilities. We condemn any   threats to the security of UNIFIL personnel and call on all parties to   uphold their obligations to ensure their safety, allowing them to   fulfill their mandate.
We welcome discussions held at the Humanitarian Conference organized   in the framework of the G7 Ministers' Meeting on Development in Pescara   on October 22 with countries from the region and International   Organizations, and at the International Conference in Support of   Lebanon's people and Sovereignty hosted in Paris on October 24, to   assess and address the urgent humanitarian needs in the region and   accelerate coordination to alleviate the suffering of the civilian   population.
We also welcome the progress in the implementation of the "Food for   Gaza" initiative - launched by Italy together with the Food and   Agriculture Organization, the World Food Programme and International   Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent to facilitate the delivery of   aid.
The death toll in Gaza is tragic and continues to rise. The situation   in Gaza has led to unprecedented levels of food insecurity, affecting   much of the population, particularly in the North. Securing humanitarian   access through all crossing points is a priority, as is ensuring   security for aid to actually be delivered to the most vulnerable inside   Gaza. All parties must facilitate aid delivery and protect humanitarian   workers by implementing necessary de-confliction measures. It is   critical that there be no interruption in the delivery of aid and   essential services to those who need it most. We express our support to   UNRWA to effectively uphold its mandate and we emphasize the vital role   that the UN Agency plays. We urge the Israeli Government to abide by its   international obligations, and fulfill its responsibility to facilitate   full, rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian assistance in all its   forms as well as the provision of sorely needed basic services to the   civilian population in Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
We express our concern for the deteriorating security situation in   the West Bank. All parties must refrain from unilateral actions and from   divisive statements that may undermine the prospect of a two-state   solution including Israeli's expansion of settlements, legalization of   settlement outposts and any annexation of the West Bank. We express our   strongest condemnation for the rise in extremist settler violence   committed against Palestinians, which undermines security and stability   in the West Bank and threatens prospects for a lasting peace.   Maintaining economic stability in the West Bank is critical for regional   security. We urge Israeli authorities to release all withheld clearance   revenues, remove measures that exacerbate the economic situation in the   West Bank and extend correspondent banking relationships with   Palestinian financial institutions.
In exercising its right to defend itself, Israel must fully comply   with its obligations under international law in all circumstances,   including International Humanitarian Law. We reiterate our commitment to   International Humanitarian Law and will comply with our respective   obligations. We underline that there can be no equivalence between the   terrorist group Hamas and the State of Israel.
We reaffirm our unwavering commitment, through reinvigorated efforts   in the Middle East Peace Process, to the vision of a two-state solution   where two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in   peace within secure and recognized borders, consistent with   international law and relevant UN resolutions. In this regard, we stress   the importance of unifying the Gaza Strip with the West Bank under the   Palestinian Authority.
We reiterate our commitment to support civil society peacebuilding   efforts, ensuring that they are part of a larger strategy to build the   foundation for a negotiated and lasting Israeli-Palestinian peace.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of Iran's missile attacks   against Israel, which pose a serious threat to regional stability. We   also condemn continuous destabilizing actions of Iran's affiliated armed   groups - including Hamas, Hezbollah and the Houthis, as well as armed   militias in Iraq and Syria.
We will continue to work to avoid further escalation. A wider   conflict in the region is in nobody's interest. We call on all parties   to show restraint.
We reiterate our determination that Iran must never develop or   acquire a nuclear weapon. We will continue to work together, and with   other international partners, to address Iran's nuclear escalation. A   diplomatic solution remains the best way to resolve this issue. Iran   must cease and reverse nuclear activities that have no credible civilian   justification and cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency   without further delay to fully implement its legally binding safeguards   agreement and commitments under UNSC resolution 2231 (2015). We   reiterate our deep concern over Iran's human rights violations,   especially against women, girls and minority groups. We call on Iran's   leadership to end all unjust and arbitrary detentions, including of dual   and foreign citizens, and condemn the unacceptable harassment of its   citizens. We call on Iran to allow access to the country to relevant   Human Rights Council Special Procedures mandate holders.
We strongly condemn the transfer of Iranian weaponry to Russia. We   are already responding with new and significant measures. Iran must   immediately cease all support to Russia's war of aggression against   Ukraine and halt such transfers of ballistic missiles, UAVs and related   technology.
The Houthis attacks against commercial shipping transiting the Red   Sea and the Gulf of Aden must stop. These attacks constitute an   egregious violation of international law. They have killed innocent   seafarers, continue to endanger the lives and safety of crews and have   exposed ecosystems in the area and coastal States to serious and grave   environmental risks. We urge the Houthis to immediately release the MV   Galaxy Leader and its crew. We note with satisfaction the intervention   of the EU maritime operation ASPIDES and partners in preventing an   environmental disaster in the case of the MT Delta Sounion. We reaffirm   the right of countries to defend their vessels, in line with UNSC   resolution 2722 (2024) and in accordance with international law. We   applaud the efforts of ASPIDES and the US-led operation Prosperity   Guardian in protecting vital sea lanes.
We strongly condemn the Houthis' unjustified detention of UN, NGO,   civil society and diplomatic personnel in Yemen, demanding their   immediate release. We urge the Houthis to respect international   humanitarian law and ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.
We express deep concern about the repercussions of the crisis in the   Red Sea also on the peace process in Yemen. We call on all parties,   especially the Houthis, to resume negotiations in a responsible and   constructive manner, in line with the UN-facilitated understanding   reached in December 2023.
IV. INDO-PACIFIC AND THE REGION
We are committed to upholding a free and open Indo-Pacific, based on   the rule of law, which is inclusive, prosperous and secure, grounded on   sovereignty, territorial integrity, peaceful resolution of disputes,   fundamental freedoms and human rights. We reaffirm our unwavering   support for ASEAN centrality and unity and our commitment to promoting   cooperation in line with ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific. We reaffirm   our support for the objectives set in the PIF 2050 Strategy for the Blue   Pacific Continent.
We will continue strengthening the work of the Partnership for Global   Infrastructure and Investment (PGII) in the Indo-Pacific, including   through the PGII-Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF)   Investment Accelerator. We welcome the development of the Luzon Economic   Corridor, the first PGII corridor in the Indo-Pacific, which will bring   quality infrastructure and investment to the region.
As we seek constructive and stable relations with China, we recognize   the importance of direct and candid engagement to express concerns and   manage differences. We reaffirm our readiness to cooperate with China to   address global challenges
We are deeply concerned by China's increasing support to Russia and   Russia's defense industrial base, which is decisively enabling Russia to   maintain its illegal war in Ukraine and to reconstitute its armed   forces and has significant broad-based security implications. China must   prevent its companies from transferring weapons, especially attack   Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), dual-use materials, including weapons   components, and equipment. We also call on China to step up efforts to   promote international peace and security and to press Russia to stop its   military aggression and immediately, completely and unconditionally   withdraw its troops from Ukraine.
We recognize the importance of China in global trade. We are not   trying to harm China or thwart its economic development, indeed a   growing China that plays by international rules and norms would be of   global interest. However, we express our concerns about China's   non-market policies and practices that are leading to harmful   overcapacity and market distortions, undermining our workers, industries   and economic resilience and security. We are not decoupling or turning   inwards. Together with our partners, we are de-risking and diversifying   supply chains, where necessary and appropriate to reduce critical   dependencies and vulnerabilities and to foster resilience to economic   coercion. We further call on China to refrain from adopting export   control measures, particularly on critical minerals, that could lead to   significant supply chain disruptions.
We remain seriously concerned about the situation in the East and   South China Seas. We reiterate our strong opposition to any unilateral   attempts to change the status quo by force or coercion. There is no   legal basis for China's expansive maritime claims in the South China   Sea. We reiterate our opposition to China's militarization and coercive   and intimidation activities in the South China Sea. We re-emphasize the   universal and unified character of the United Nations Convention on the   Law of the Sea and reaffirm its important role in setting out the legal   framework that governs all activities in the oceans and seas. We   continue to oppose China's dangerous use of coast guard and maritime   militia in the South China Sea and its repeated obstruction of   countries' freedom of navigation and overflight. We express deep concern   over the increasing use of dangerous maneuvers and water cannons   against Philippine and Vietnamese vessels. We reiterate that the award   rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal on 12 July 2016 is a significant   milestone, which is legally binding upon the parties to those   proceedings and a useful basis for peacefully resolving disputes between   the parties.
Maintaining peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait is   indispensable to international security and prosperity. We call for the   peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues. There is no change in the   basic position of the G7 members on Taiwan, including stated One-China   policies. We support Taiwan's meaningful participation in international   organizations as a member where statehood is not a prerequisite and as   an observer or guest where it is.
We remain concerned by the human rights situation in China, including   in Xinjiang and Tibet. We remain concerned by the erosion of civil   society, human rights and fundamental freedoms in Hong Kong. The   sentencing of 45 pro-democracy politicians and activists marks a further   deterioration of democratic participation and pluralism, which   undermines confidence in the rule of law as enshrined in the Hong Kong   Basic Law, and therefore Hong Kong's and the People's Republic of   China's international legal obligations. We urge China and the Hong Kong   authorities to abide by their international human rights commitments   and legal obligations.
We call on China not to conduct or condone activities aimed at   undermining the security and safety of our communities and the integrity   of our democratic institutions, and to act in strict accordance with   its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and   the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
We strongly condemn the DPRK's continuing expansion of its unlawful   nuclear and ballistic missile programs and its continuous destabilizing   activities. We further reiterate our call for the complete   denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and demand that DPRK abandon   all its nuclear weapons, existing nuclear programs, and any other WMD   and ballistic missile programs in a complete, verifiable, and   irreversible manner, in accordance with all relevant UNSC resolutions.   We urge all UN Member States to fully implement all relevant UN Security   Council resolutions.
Following Russia's disturbing veto last March on the mandate renewal   of the UNSC 1718 Committee Panel of Experts, we are working with the   international community to establish alternative multilateral   mechanisms, including the recently established Multilateral Sanctions   Monitoring Team (MSMT), to monitor and report on violations and evasions   of the sanction measures stipulated in the relevant UNSC resolutions ,   based on our commitment to uphold international peace and security and   to safeguard the global non-proliferation regime.
We strongly condemn DPRK's systematic human rights violations and   abuses and its choice to prioritize its unlawful weapons development   programs over the welfare of the people of DPRK. We call upon DPRK to   resolve the abductions issue immediately.
V. PARTNERSHIPS WITH AFRICAN COUNTRIES
We reiterate our commitment to support African nations in the pursuit   of peace, stability and sustainable development, as well as the   creation of jobs and growth. We will continue to build equitable and   sustainable partnerships with Africa based on result-based initiatives,   aligned with the African Union Agenda 2063 and the integrated African   continental thematic plans, in order to jointly tackle global   challenges. We reiterate our commitment to support the African Union in   the pursuit of peace and stability.
We recognize the importance of bridging digital divides and   strengthening the value chain between G7 and African countries. In this   respect, we welcome the progress made by the G7 Italian Presidency in   collaboration with UNDP in the co-design of the "AI Hub for Sustainable   Development," set to focus on key sectors including agriculture, health,   infrastructure, education and training, water, and energy, in the   spirit of the Mattei Plan. The Hub embodies the G7's commitment to   "Growing Together" with partner countries, advancing shared goals of   sustainable development and ensuring that the digital age contributes to   a more inclusive and prosperous future for all. We also welcome the G20   recognition of the WHO-led Global Initiative on Digital Health (GIDH)   and the Global Digital Health Certification Network, aligning support   and guidance for digital transformation.
Building on the achievements of previous G7 Presidencies, we will   continue strengthening the G7 Partnership for Global Infrastructure and   Investment (PGII) in the African continent as well as initiatives such   as the EU Global Gateway. PGII offers a framework to promote   sustainable, climate neutral, inclusive, resilient and economically   viable quality infrastructure, underpinned by high standards,   transparent project selection, procurement and finance. While PGII has a   global reach, we commit to focus on regions and sectors where   infrastructure investment has the greatest impact, including the African   continent.
We welcome the decisions taken at the G7 Development Ministers'   meeting in Pescara to launch the PGII secretariat, for effective   implementation and investment coordination with partners, and to support   the implementation of the African Virtual Investment Platform (AVIP),   to enhance data and information, transparency and public policies on   investment in Africa, in line with the Apulia G7 Leaders' commitment to   enhance the PGII. PGII will work together with Public Development Banks,   Development Finance Institutions, Multilateral Development Banks and   the private sector to improve enabling environments and country-based   investment design, coordination and co-financing.
In line with the integrated African continental plans for improved   local and regional infrastructure, trade and food security, initial   pilots will be linked to economic corridors, such as the Lobito Corridor   in Southern and Central Africa.
We welcome the G7 leader's decision to launch the "Energy for Growth   in Africa" initiative, that will help to overcome barriers to   investments in clean energy across Africa.
We also welcome the launch of the G7 Apulia Food Systems Initiative   (AFSI), a package of initiatives to improve food security and nutrition   and harness the role of agriculture and food systems for achieving the   Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), with a focus on Africa. The AFSI   will concentrate on concrete actions on the ground, supporting   multi-stakeholder initiatives to promote sustainable and resilient   agriculture and food systems, including in coffee value-chains, and   fight malnutrition, with a focus on childhood stunting and wasting.
We commend the launch of Gavi's African Vaccine Manufacturing   Accelerator (AVMA) and look forward to collaborating with Gavi, the   African Union and Africa CDC to develop regional vaccine manufacturing   capacity.
VI. MIGRATION
In line with the Apulia G7 Leaders' Communiqué, we affirm our   collective commitment to enhance cooperation to address the drivers of   irregular migration and forced displacement, such as global poverty,   instability, climate change and seize the opportunities migration brings   globally. In doing so we will work in partnership with countries of   origin, transit and destination to support their sustainable   development, resilience and stability.
VII. REGIONAL ISSUES
Afghanistan
We are appalled by the continued and systemic abuses of human rights   and the growing restrictions imposed by the Taliban on the lives of the   Afghan people, particularly women and girls, in violation of   international obligations and Treaties to which Afghanistan is a State   Party. We will continue to provide assistance to address the severe and   deteriorating humanitarian crisis in the country.
We remain committed to supporting the people of Afghanistan. The   objective of an Afghanistan at peace with itself and its neighbors,   fully reintegrated into the international community and meeting   international obligations can only be achieved through an inclusive and   representative political process regarding the future of the country,   ensuring the full, equal, safe and meaningful participation of Afghan   women, in line with the UN independent assessment - as recognized by   UNSC Resolution 2721 (2023) - and UNSC resolution 2593 (2021).
Great Lakes
The G7 is deeply concerned by the ongoing crisis in the Great Lakes   region, marked by armed violence, widespread human rights violations and   abuses, and worsening displacement of populations. We strongly condemn   the atrocities committed by any armed groups, as well as the violations   of international law by any parties. We continue to express deep concern   about the reports on foreign military support for M23 and direct   military interventions on Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) territory.   We call for the territorial integrity of the DRC to be respected. We   stress the urgent need for immediate, safe, and unimpeded humanitarian   access to affected populations.
We fully support the mediation led by Angola and President Joao   Lourenço between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda. We urge   the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda to achieve swift progress in   the implementation of the commitments made through the Luanda Process.   The current ceasefire, which went into effect on August 4th, should be   respected strictly. It is imperative that all regional actors refrain   from any direct or indirect support to armed groups.
We reaffirm our support for efforts to combat the illegal   exploitation of natural resources and to promote sustainable and   equitable development for the benefit of local populations.
Haiti
We condemn the continued violence and human rights abuses perpetrated   by armed gangs in Haiti. We reiterate our support to the efforts of the   Transitional Presidential Council (CPT) and we take note of the   appointment of Mr Alix Didier Fils-Aimé as Prime Minister of Haiti. We   call upon all Haitian political actors to work together to restore   democratic institutions and the rule of law in Haiti, leading the   Country to a new democratically elected government in office by February   2026. We reiterate our full support to the Multinational Security   Support (MSS) mission, which is providing critical support to the   Haitian National Police against criminal gangs. We emphasize the   importance of continued financial contributions to the UN Trust Fund as   well as contributions in kind to the MSS mission, in the face of   persisting dire conditions on the ground. It remains essential to create   the necessary security conditions for convening the elections. We are   gravely concerned that nearly half of Haiti's population is acutely food   insecure. We call on all Haiti's partners to continue their support for   humanitarian and development assistance to the Haitian people. We   support Haiti's request for the United Nations to consider a transition   of the MSS mission to a peacekeeping operation.
Libya
We reaffirm our commitment to preserving Libya's sovereignty,   stability, independence, territorial integrity, and national unity, and   support a positive response to Libya's request to the UN Security   Council for international assistance to enhance security coordination   among Libyan security forces throughout the country. We deplore Russia's   malign activities in Libya, which undermine Libyan sovereignty and   regional security and we call for the withdrawal of all foreign fighters   and mercenaries from Libya without delay. We strongly support the   longstanding efforts by the United Nations and UNSMIL officer in charge   Stephanie Koury to facilitate meaningful and inclusive dialogue among   Libyan parties in order to reverse institutional fragmentation and move   towards sustainable stability and security. In this regard, the recent   agreement on the appointment of the new leadership of the Central Bank   of Libya represents an opportunity to relaunch a process towards a   comprehensive political agreement based on compromise. That will pave   the way towards free, fair and inclusive presidential and parliamentary   elections conducive to the reunification of Libya's government and   political, economic and military institutions. We furthermore affirm our   support for the High National Elections Commission and the first round   of municipal elections held on November 16, which offer Libyans the   chance to exercise their democratic rights.
Myanmar
The brutal military regime in Myanmar must stop all violence -   including airstrikes - that harm civilians, release all those   arbitrarily detained and engage in a truly inclusive dialogue with all   stakeholders. UNSC Resolution 2669 (2022) must be implemented fully and   without conditions. We call on all armed actors to protect civilians and   allow unhindered humanitarian access. We support ASEAN's efforts to   achieve swift and complete implementation of the Five-Point Consensus   and advocate for a strengthened UN engagement. We welcome the UN Special   Evoy's recent visit to Myanmar and her efforts to resolve the crisis.   We call for the regime to stop restricting access to UN Agencies,   humanitarian aid, independent and international humanitarian actors, and   allow full and unimpeded access to the Independent Investigative   Mechanism for Myanmar. We call for the cessation of any arms and   dual-use materials' transfers to the Myanmar military, including jet   fuel. It is necessary to work towards a political solution that truly   honors the aspirations of the Myanmar people to live in peace, freedom   and democracy. We reiterate the need to create conditions for   sustainable, voluntary, safe and dignified returns of displaced Rohingya   and other refugees.
Somalia
We welcome Somalia's enduring efforts at institution building and in   the fight against terrorism. We deem the stabilization of Somalia as a   relevant factor to guaranteeing that both the Horn of Africa and the Red   Sea lanes be secure. We encourage the Somali Government to continue in   its path of consolidation of the Federal institutional framework and to   undertake a transparent and inclusive constitutional reform process. We   stand alongside Somalia in its fight against the terrorist movement of   Al-Shabaab and other violent organizations. As for the upcoming   termination of the African Union Transitional Mission (ATMIS), we   believe it is essential to avoid any security gap that jihadist   terrorism could exploit, before the transfer of responsibilities to   national security forces is completed. Therefore, we support the new   African Union Support Mission to Somalia (AUSSOM) and we encourage both   the Somali Government and the AU to envisage an operational framework   than ensures the mission can truly continue to provide stability to both   the Country and the region. We call on all partners to ensure that the   new mission has the support and funding it requires to succeed.
Sudan
A year and a half into the fighting, Sudan's civil war has taken a   devastating toll on human lives and vital infrastructure. We reiterate   our firm condemnation of ongoing attacks, including indiscriminate and   direct targeting of civilians by both parties, which is causing massive   displacement of people throughout the region, and worsening an already   dreadful humanitarian situation. We call for an immediate end to   violence. We especially note the impact of the crisis on women and girls   and condemn the atrocities being committed by both sides, including   kidnapping and sexual violence. All parties to the conflict must engage   in serious negotiations aimed at achieving a lasting ceasefire,   humanitarian access and protection of civilians without pre-conditions.   All external actors must stop fueling the conflict, in line with the   commitments made in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the Paris   Conference, and respect the UN arms embargo on Darfur.
We urge the Sudanese Armed Forces, the Rapid Support Forces and their   allied militias to comply with International Humanitarian Law,   protecting civilians and facilitating rapid, safe and unhindered   humanitarian access both into Sudan and across lines of conflict.
We note with grave concern that the UN Fact Finding Mission has found   reasonable grounds to believe that Rapid Support Forces and allied   militias have "committed crimes against humanity, including persecution   on the basis of ethnicity and forcible displacement of the population",   and that Sudanese Armed Forces have committed "war crimes of violence to   life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel   treatment and torture".
We urge the warring parties to implement their Jeddah Declaration   commitments, and we urge for the establishment of a robust and   transparent monitoring and verification mechanism for the protection of   civilians.
Venezuela
On July 28 the Venezuelan people made a clear choice in the polls,   voting for democratic change and supporting Edmundo González Urrutia by a   significant majority according to publicly available electoral records.   We will continue to support efforts by regional partners to facilitate a   Venezuelan-led democratic and peaceful transition that will ensure   respect for the will of the voters.
We are deeply troubled by the continued violations and abuses of   human rights, including arbitrary detentions and severe restrictions on   fundamental freedoms, targeting in particular political opponents, civil   society, and independent media. All unjustly detained political   prisoners must be released.
End Text.


