New Zealand will sign up to the UK's 'Shadow Fleet' initiative, as part of the first annual UK-NZ Foreign Ministers' Dialogue in London.
29 November 2024
First of new annual meeting between UK and New Zealand foreign ministers takes place in London
Shared priorities including trade and growth, and climate and security at the top of the agenda
Pacific communities to benefit from clean energy in UK-NZ joint   funding commitment for renewable energy projects following the Prime   Minister's visit to the region
New Zealand will sign up to the UK's 'Shadow Fleet' initiative, as   part of the first annual UK-NZ Foreign Ministers' Dialogue in London.
Foreign Secretary David Lammy met with his New Zealand counterpart   Winston Peters to discuss a wide range of shared priorities, from trade   and economic growth to security challenges and climate action.
This included New Zealand's confirmation that it will sign up to the   UK-led 'Shadow Fleet' call to action, an initiative which addresses the   environmental and security risks posed by Russia's 'shadow fleet' - a   desperate and dangerous attempt to soften the blow of our sanctions.
As part of a wider commitment to cooperate closely on development   outcomes in the Pacific, they agreed joint funding to bolster renewable   energy projects in the Pacific, increasing energy access and bringing   clean energy to communities by reducing reliance on expensive imported   diesel. A combined funding commitment of ÂŁ23.9 million will support   private sector investment in the first of its kind blended finance   platform in the region.
This follows the Prime Minister's historic visit to Samoa in October   for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, where he became the   first UK Prime Minister to ever visit a Pacific Island country. The   Prime Minister reaffirmed the UK's commitment to supporting people in   the Pacific and working with them to unlock opportunities that will   drive growth and promote security and prosperity in the region, as well   as in the UK.
The Ministers' discussions also highlighted the growing science and   technology partnership between our countries, as well as the growing   economic relationship.
Our active Free Trade Agreement is expected to increase trade with   New Zealand by almost 60%, adding ÂŁ200 million to household wages in the   long term and supporting hardworking British people.
The Trade Agreement drove ÂŁ3.4 billion of trade in goods and services   between the UK and New Zealand in the four quarters to the end of Q2   2024, with the UK travel sector alone bringing in ÂŁ414 million.
Exports to New Zealand support around 13,600 jobs in the UK, while   around 6,600 UK VAT-registered businesses exported goods to New Zealand   last year. Meanwhile the UK's accession to the Comprehensive and   Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) will be   confirmed on 15 December 2024.
Reaffirming the UK and New Zealand's commitment to preserving   Antarctica's fragile environment, the Ministers also signed the UK-NZ   Statement on Antarctic Cooperation Priorities to 2028, committing to an   annual Antarctic Dialogue to strengthen joint scientific and   conservation efforts, as well as upholding the peaceful use of   Antarctica.
Foreign Secretary David Lammy said:
I welcome this valuable opportunity to discuss the enduring   strength and relevance of the UK-New Zealand partnership with Foreign   Minister Peters. Our shared values and strategic outlook make us natural   partners in addressing global challenges, from supporting Ukraine to   tackling climate change.
The concrete steps we've taken today show how   our relationship continues to deliver practical benefits for both our   nations and the wider world.
New Zealand Foreign Minister Winston Peters said:
The United Kingdom is our oldest, and one of our   closest and most trusted partners. While we are separated by vast   distance, our close cultural links and shared history and values enable   us to achieve more together in the world.
The discussions covered shared international priorities, including   support for Ukraine, Middle East developments, and Indo-Pacific   security. Both nations reaffirmed their commitment to the rules-based   international system and discussed deepening defence cooperation.
The Dialogue delivered several other outcomes, including:
Enhanced cooperation between Border Agencies to combat child sexual abuse and exploitation
Plans for a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on National Security Science and Technology cooperation
Welcoming the first detection of earthquakes using quantum technologies by a joint UK-NZ team
Fresh funding for a joint regional initiative through the Pacific   Regional Invasive Species Management Support Service (PRISMSS) to   support ecosystem resilience and climate adaptation in Pacific Island   Countries
This was the first annual formal UK-NZ Foreign Ministers' Dialogue.
The renewable energy project is funded through the Transforming   Island Development through Electrification and Sustainability (TIDES)   project under the Pacific Clean Energy Programme (PCEP).
The Restoring Island Resilience initiative is a new collaboration   between the UK, New Zealand and the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional   Environment Programme (SPREP). This initiative delivers climate and   biodiversity impact through the Pacific Regional Invasive Species   Management Support Service (PRISMSS).
The Memorandum of Understanding on National Security Science and   Technology cooperation will see bilateral working on research and   technology development, including joint research and projects, to   deliver national security and counterterrorism objectives. This will   enable an innovation fast track to help tackle a range of threats to   border security, cybersecurity and critical infrastructure.
Enhanced cooperation between border agencies on child sexual   abuse and exploitation will see the UK Border Force and the NZ Customs   Service work together to strengthen our borders against digital threats   including child sexual abuse material, travelling child sex offenders,   modern slavery and other forms of digital harm.
Scientists from the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and the   Measurement Standards Laboratory (MSL) in New Zealand have successfully   detected a multitude of earthquakes in the Pacific Ocean using a   pioneering detection technique. The international collaboration was   enabled by the UK's International Science Partnership Fund and is   supported by New Zealand's Quantum Technologies Aotearoa programme.



