Legislation changing Scotland's climate change targets has been passed by MSPs.
The Climate Change Bill scraps annual targets and the 2030 and 2040 interim targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions but keeps the aim of reaching net-zero by 2045.
It comes after the Scottish government accepted it could not reach its target of reducing emissions by 75% by 2030.
The bill passed in Holyrood by 105 votes to zero, receiving support from all parties, apart from the Scottish Greens whose seven MSPs abstained.
The Scottish Conservatives described the revised targets as "a humiliating climbdown".
However, acting Net Zero Secretary Gillian Martin said the Scottish government was "unwavering" in its commitment to achieve net zero by 2045.
She said: "It is crucial that our target pathway to 2045 is set at a pace and scale that is feasible and reflects the latest independent expert advice.
"Carbon budgets are an established model for assessment of emissions reductions used by other nations including Japan, France, England and Wales, and they will include emissions from international aviation and shipping and there will be no provision to 'carry over' emissions from one carbon budget to another.
"We will continue leading on climate action that is fair, ambitious and capable of rising to the emergency before us and reflects our commitment to the ambition of credible emissions reduction."
The Scottish government accepted in April that its previous goal was "out of reach", but because it was included in climate change legislation, ministers have had to bring forward the Bill to amend it.
As well as amending previous 2019 legislation, the new Climate Change (Emissions Reduction Targets) (Scotland) Bill will see a move to a five-year cycle of carbon budgeting, instead of reducing gradually by a set time.
As a minority government, the SNP needed support from other parties to pass the Bill before it could become law.
Ahead of the vote, Scottish Greens co-leader Patrick Harvie said his party would only be willing to vote in favour of the Bill if the Scottish government "commits to accelerated climate action".
The seven Scottish Green MSPs ultimately abstained from the vote.
Harvie told MSPs: "I think we should be a bit embarrassed by the need for this Bill."
Scottish Lib Dem MSP Liam McArthur said the Bill could not be "another escape hatch" for the Scottish government, and that ministers should be "moving heaven and earth" to deliver for the climate and communities.
Scottish Conservative net zero spokesperson Douglas Lumsden said the Bill was a "humiliating climbdown" for the Scottish government.
He said: "The SNP are all talk and no action when it comes to climate change.
"They missed their own annual climate targets in nine out of the last 13 occasions and their sheer incompetence means they have now dumped them altogether."
Scottish Labour net zero spokesperson Sarah Boyack said it was a "day of shame" for the SNP with climate targets left "in tatters".
She added: "The SNP cannot make the same mistakes again - this Bill must be backed up with a real plan to meet our remaining targets and ensure our homes, transport and communities can deliver the just transition we urgently need."