The Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, Benjamin Kalu, has called for data on Internally Displaced Persons in Nigeria, as well as those in neighbouring countries who have been rendered homeless by natural disasters.
Kalu made the call during a courtesy visit by the Federal Commissioner of the National Commission for Refugees, Migrants, and IDPs, Tijani Ahmed, in Abuja on Wednesday.
A statement issued on Thursday by the Chief Press Secretary to the Deputy Speaker, Levinus Nwabughiogu, quoted Kalu as attributing some of the displacements to the impact of natural disasters such as flooding and erosion.
“We are charging your commission to provide us with a full report on the plight of Nigerians currently displaced across the country. Let the Commission have an intervention fund dedicated to conducting a proper needs analysis so that when we are planning the budget, we can take it into consideration. This is part of the oversight function, so please provide us with that report.
“Your mandate includes refugees and Internally Displaced Persons. You cannot only be displaced through war or crisis; climate-induced displacement is also a significant factor, and that is what we are experiencing now.
“The climate is at war with us. Therefore, the issue of mitigation and adaptation is something that, as a government, we must take seriously. But in doing so, agencies like yours, who manage the consequences of these climate impacts, need to be aware that the situation is more severe than what we are seeing currently.
“We have heard of what happened in Maiduguri, and I even mentioned it at the African Union. But beyond Maiduguri, there is a lot more happening around the country,” Kalu said.
The statement further called attention to the need to increase the yearly budgetary allocation to the Commission to enable it to effectively carry out its mandate.
“How prepared are you? I checked your budget last year and wondered if a budget of N1.6bn, or thereabouts, would be sufficient to handle the situation across the country.
“And I have not heard your agency bring this to the forefront, either in Parliament or to Nigerians, perhaps through a documentary, to show us the scale of the needs and to highlight the plight of Nigerians.”
“There are so many people suffering due to climate change. Parliament needs to hear from you on the total national needs analysis of Internally Displaced Persons and the impact of climate-induced displacement. We need a document on that.
“We are giving you two weeks to provide the report because we want it to guide us as we plan the budget. A copy of that report will also be sent to the Budget Office of the Federation so they will understand the full scope of your mandate,” he added.
In his remarks, Ahmed expressed gratitude to the Deputy Speaker, pledging to make the report available to Parliament within the given two-week deadline, while also appealing for more funding for the Commission.
“We thank you for this opportunity today, and I have listened carefully. We will ensure that the reports are compiled, both for refugees and displaced persons, to present to Parliament. We also hope that you will see the challenges the Commission faces in terms of funding,” he said