Fifa's deal with Aramco includes sponsorship rights for the men's World Cup in 2026 and the Women's World Cup the following year
Last month, more than 100 female professional footballers from across the globe came together to criticise Fifa's partnership with Saudi oil giant Aramco, denouncing the deal on environmental and humanitarian grounds.
Now, following the United Nations' COP29 climate summit, the only African who signed the open letter , external has revealed why she took part in the protest.
Former Nigeria international Ayisat Yusuf has described Fifa's decision to work with Aramco as "not justifiable", despite football's governing body stating that sponsorship revenues are reinvested back into the women's game "at all levels".
"Fifa don't have to take money above humanity," Yusuf told BBC Sport Africa.
"It's very important we let people know that partnership - giving sponsorship to Aramco - does not stand for what our values [as female footballers] are.
"Our values should be put first regardless of the money. We're just making our voice heard, for them to also reconsider and think about humanity, our health and our human rights."
Aramco, owned by the Saudi Arabian state, is the the biggest oil producer in the world. Its three-year deal with Fifa gives it sponsorship rights to the men’s World Cup in 2026 and the Women’s World Cup the following year.
As well as criticising its negative impact on the climate via greenhouse gas emissions, the players' letter highlighted allegations of human rights violations by the Gulf kingdom, describing the partnership as a "punch in the stomach" and a significant setback for women's football.
They also called for the establishment of a review committee, with player representation, to evaluate the ethical implications of Fifa's future sponsorships agreements.
A Fifa spokesperson told BBC Sport Africa it "values its partnership with Aramco" and said it was "an inclusive organisation with many commercial partners also supporting other organisations in football and other sports".
Citing last year's Women's World Cup, it also said: "As well as the increased support for teams at the tournament last year, Fifa’s updated Women’s Football Strategy for 2023-2027 further highlights how commercial revenues are reinvested back into the development of the women’s game."
Aramco say "environmental stewardship is deeply integral" to the company's approach, and it will continue to "innovate and explore management solutions" that minimise the environmental impact of its activities and products.
Ayisat Yusuf was a member of the Nigeria squad at the 2007 Fifa Women's World Cup, and won a total of 68 caps for the Super Falcons
Aramco's partnership with Fifa is the latest example of Saudi Arabia investing in sports and hosting high-profile events as a means to enhance its global image - a strategy which has been labelled by critics such as Human Rights Watch as ‘sportswashing’.
Saudi Arabia is the only bidder for the 2034 Fifa World Cup and is expected to be confirmed as the host country next month.
The Aramco deal, which was announced in April, has also been criticised by environmental groups and has raised further questions about Fifa's climate impact.
How to help poorer countries curb emissions of planet-warming gases and cope with the impacts of climate change has been high on the agenda at COP29 in Baku, Azerbaijan.
"Climate change is a global issue and affects most people that do sport. It is very important," Yusuf said.
"We are all fighting for a common goal and for the betterment of everyone, for us to live in a safe environment.
"If we don't [deal with] this now it's going to be too late, and even more disastrous."
Yusuf has called on Fifa to find alternative sponsors - even if that means there is less prize money or funds to be distributed throughout the game.
William Troost-Ekong wore sustainable football boots made from castor beans, sugarcane and bamboo at the Africa Cup of Nations this year
At the Africa Cup of Nations earlier this year, William Troost-Ekong made history as the first footballer to wear boots made from recycled materials at an international tournament.
The Nigeria men's captain is an investor and ambassador for the company which manufactures the boots, which are made of corn waste.
The Al-Kholood defender believes that the sporting world should work harder to support global efforts on climate change.
"Sport is such a big influence around the world," Troost-Ekong told BBC Sport Africa.
"It's not only about the players. We talk about the organisers of the big tournaments, the clubs, the owners of teams, and of course the fans - because those are the biggest numbers."
Away from football, Kenyan marathon great Eliud Kipchoge is known for his passionate conservation efforts including tree-planting drives.
It is a measure Troost-Ekong supports.
He planted trees to offset the total carbon footprint of his transfer from Watford to Italian club Salernitana in January 2023.
His campaigning over recent years was inspired by fatherhood.
"I've got three young children," said the 31-year-old.
"I would like to think that they can enjoy the same things that we get to enjoy.
“We have to be mindful of the changes that are happening and making the positive changes ourselves to really make a difference."
Premier League club Arsenal aim to reach net-zero by 2040, with their plan focusing on reducing and decarbonising energy consumption across Emirates Stadium
In 2018, UN Climate Change launched its Sports for Climate Action Framework at COP24 in Poland.
It aims to provide a route for the global sports community to combat climate change, and use sport as a unifying tool to drive climate awareness.
Arsenal became the first Premier League club to sign up to the framework in 2020. They plan to reach net-zero - eliminating greenhouse gas emissions - by 2040.
That target was approved by Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi), a global body that enables businesses to set ambitious emissions reduction targets in line with the latest climate science.
"Arsenal is one of the [most] well-known clubs in the world," Yusuf said.
"For them to take the lead, I'm sure that at some point other clubs will join."
Yusuf believes sports organisations, clubs and individual players, can do more to protect the environment.
"My message to them is that sustainability is not short term, it should be a long-time thing," she added.
"Sport leaders are very important and should get more involved. Education is the best way.
"Before you know it, everyone will come along to support the cause and make the world a better place by tackling climate change."