The United Nations Children’s Fund has called for the inclusion of climate change education in the Nigerian education curriculum.
Chief of the UNICEF Field Office for southwest Nigeria, Celine Lafoucriere, disclosed this at an event organised by UNICEF to mark World Children’s Day on Wednesday in Lagos.
She revealed that over 100 million children’s education in Nigeria is currently being affected by climate change.
This year, UNICEF is focusing on how climate change affects the younger generation, and that every child has the right to live on a healthy planet free from the devastating consequences of environmental degradation.
Lafoucriere said, “The stark reality is that over 100 million children in Nigeria are currently being impacted by climate change.
“Nigeria is one of the three countries most affected by climate change.
These children face the consequences of flooding, poor sanitation, health risks, and water scarcity. With climate change exacerbating existing challenges like access to clean water and education, UNICEF is calling for more governmental action to mitigate these impacts.
“The government has a social responsibility to protect its population, and that includes ensuring that climate change education is embedded in the national curriculum from an early age, starting from primary school,” she said.
Additionally, she stressed the need for proper facilities to manage waste, recycle plastics, and prevent environmental disasters, such as flooding, which could lead to the spread of diseases.
“Furthermore, the government must ensure access to clean water, as waterborne diseases and malnutrition pose serious risks to children’s health and educational opportunities. If children are sick, they cannot thrive in school,” she added,
Lafoucriere explained that the private sector also had a crucial role to play in the fight against climate change through collaboration between government, businesses, and other stakeholders.
In a similar vein, the Commissioner for Youth and Social Development in Lagos State, Mr Abubakre Ogunlende, reaffirmed the state’s commitment to safeguarding and promoting children’s rights.
Ogunlende, represented by Mrs Adenike Obilana, the Deputy Director of Child Development in the Lagos State Ministry of Youth and Social Development, said that World Children’s Day symbolised the unity and dedication of global leaders in protecting children’s rights.
He stressed the importance of ensuring that children had access to survival, development, protection, and the opportunity to participate in decisions that affect them.
In recognition of the 33rd annual celebration of the Treaty for the Prevention of Child Rights Violations, Ogunlende highlighted the significance of this year’s theme, “Climate change has a significant impact on the survival and well-being of children.”
“Children must be included in the decisions and solutions to address this crisis. Their voices are critical in building a sustainable future.”
The commissioner reiterated the state’s commitment to upholding the Child Rights Law and ensuring a safe environment for every child.
“We must protect, cherish, and care for them. Let us all work together to secure a brighter future for our children,” Ogunlende concluded.
Actress and environmental advocate, Kate Henshaw, during a panel discussion at the event emphasised the urgent need for climate change education and better environmental practices in Nigeria.
Speaking on the critical issue of environmental preservation, Henshaw stressed the importance of integrating climate change into school curricula to help children make informed decisions about their environment.
“Whether we like it or not, climate change is something we’re experiencing in our environment today.
“Including the subject of climate change in the school curriculum will help children understand the choices they need to make to preserve the environment. The practices they learn in school will be carried into their homes, creating a ripple effect.”
When asked whether the government is doing enough to tackle environmental issues, Henshaw specifically called attention to the unsightly landfill site in Ojota, describing it as a hazard to the people living nearby.
“We are in the 21st century, and I don’t think I’ve traveled anywhere and seen refuse piled so high. It is dangerous for the residents and the environment,” she said.