Water scarcity, pollution, and the burden of waterborne diseases are urgent issues threatening global health and security. A recently published study in the journal Global Environmental Change highlights the pressing need for innovative economic strategies to bolster water security investments, focusing on the "enabling environment" that influences regional readiness for new business solutions.
Initiated and led by researchers at the Advanced Science Research Center at the CUNY Graduate Center (CUNY ASRC), the study utilizes a comprehensive set of geographical data—including climate, digital river networks, and human water usage patterns—to pinpoint areas at risk for water insecurity and potential conflict. The researchers discovered striking disparities in readiness across the globe, indicating varying capacities to address these critical challenges.
"We found that 71% of the world's population has high existing water security needs, and after evaluating the potential for private investments, we found that 64% of the global population could benefit from these efforts," said Charles Vörösmarty, principal investigator and founding director of the Environmental Sciences Initiative at the CUNY ASRC.
The study also revealed that 81% of identified investment opportunities are located in middle-income countries , while many low-income nations face significant barriers to making these essential investments and will likely need to depend on public financing and international aid to address water insecurity.
A recent United Nations report indicates that 80% of all nations are experiencing shortfalls in the financing necessary to meet their water supply and sanitation needs. Projections estimate that demand for water infrastructure and services could require investments amounting to several trillions of dollars by 2030.
"This research underscores that successful water investments hinge not just on addressing immediate water needs, but also on strengthening the governmental and societal frameworks that facilitate private sector engagement," said lead author Pamela Green, principal water and climate scientist at TerraBlue Science LLC.
As water security continues to emerge as a critical global challenge, this study provides valuable insights for policymakers, businesses, and investors seeking to develop effective public-private partnerships aimed at delivering sustainable water solutions.
The interdisciplinary team behind this study includes experts from the CUNY ASRC, TerraBlue Science LLC, University of Massachusetts, Harvard Extension School, GIZ GmbH, and the United Nations Environment Program-Finance Initiative.
Provided by CUNY Advanced Science Research Center