Statement follows 16 December 2024 AUKMIN meeting between the UK Foreign Secretary and Defence Secretary and the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Defence.
16 December 2024
On 16 December 2024, the Secretary of State for Foreign,   Commonwealth and Development Affairs the Rt Hon David Lammy MP and the   Secretary of State for Defence the Rt Hon John Healey MP hosted the   Minister for Foreign Affairs Senator the Hon Penny Wong and the Deputy   Prime Minister and Minister for Defence the Hon Richard Marles MP for   the Australia-UK Ministerial Consultations (AUKMIN) at Lancaster House   in London.
Ministers reflected on the strength of the UK-Australia   relationship underpinned, by a rich history and shared values, which has   evolved into a modern and dynamic partnership. Ministers agreed on the   enduring importance of the UK-Australia relationship in delivering   economic growth and positive security benefits to our peoples and   globally.
Ministers recognised the inseparable nature of the security and   prosperity of the Euro-Atlantic and Indo-Pacific regions. They committed   to working together to shape a world characterised by an adherence to   rules and norms, rather than power or coercion.
Ministers unequivocally condemned Russia's full-scale invasion of   Ukraine and demanded that Russia withdraw its troops from Ukraine's   internationally recognised territory. The UK and Australia are resolute   in their support to Ukraine's Armed Forces in the face of Russia's   illegal war of aggression. Ministers welcomed significant increases in   support for Ukraine from both the UK and Australia, including   Australia's announcement to extend its contribution to training   Ukrainian personnel through Operation Interflex, the UK-led,   multinational training effort which has now trained over 50,000   Ukrainian recruits.
Ministers shared deep concerns about the role of third countries   in enabling Russia's illegal war against Ukraine. Ministers urged China   to step up efforts to promote international peace and security including   by preventing its companies from supporting Russia's invasion and its   defence industrial base through the supply of critical components.   Ministers also called on China to use its influence with Russia to stop   its military aggression and to seek an immediate, complete and   unconditional withdrawal of its troops from Ukraine's internationally   recognised territory. Ministers strongly condemned the Democratic   People's Republic of Korea's (DPRK) support for Russia's illegal war   against Ukraine through the supply of munitions, arms and other   materiel. Ministers agreed the deployment of DPRK troops to Russia was   an alarming escalation, with impacts for the security of the   Indo-Pacific and Euro-Atlantic regions.
Ministers welcomed the ceasefire agreement in Lebanon as a   critical step for de-escalating heightened tensions in the Middle East.   Ministers strongly urged both sides to respect the terms of the   ceasefire and work to secure lasting peace. An end to the violence in   Lebanon must also be a catalyst for an end to the war in Gaza.
Ministers reiterated their condemnation of Hamas' horrendous   attacks on 7 October 2023. Ministers reiterated their call for an   immediate ceasefire in Gaza, the urgent and unconditional release of all   hostages, better protection of civilians, a significant and sustained   increase in the flow of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza, and an   enduring end to the crisis.
Ministers expressed grave concern at the humanitarian situation   and high level of civilian casualties, alongside the UN's warning that   famine is likely in parts of northern Gaza. They agreed that Israel must   do much more to deliver its promise to flood Gaza with aid. All parties   must adhere to their obligations under international humanitarian law,   including to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. They urged   all parties to ensure the protection of humanitarian workers and respect   the mandate of the UN and humanitarian partners to operate safely,   including by properly implementing de-confliction measures.
Ministers expressed concern at the legislation adopted by the   Knesset that would restrict the UNRWA's vital work in Gaza and the West   Bank. They reiterated their support for UNRWA and emphasised the vital   role it plays delivering aid in Gaza and essential services in the West   Bank, which no other UN agency has the mandate or capability to do. They   agreed UNRWA must continue to do all it can to ensure the highest   standards of governance and accountability are met.
Ministers condemned the rise in extremist settler violence   committed against Palestinians in the West Bank, including the Israeli   expansion of settlements and illegal outposts, which undermines security   and stability in the West Bank and threatens prospects for a lasting   peace. Ministers underscored the need to secure a pathway to a two-state   solution where Israelis and Palestinians can live side by side in peace   and security within internationally recognised borders.
Ministers condemned Iran's attacks on Israel and continued   provision of missiles, Uncrewed Aerial Vehicles and other military and   financial support to its partners and proxies. Ministers encouraged all   parties to exercise restraint and urged Iran to use its influence in the   region to prevent further escalation. Ministers condemned Iran's   transfer of ballistic missiles to Russia and recognised the significance   of this escalation, and the concerning trend of Iran's ever closer   military support to Russia in its war of aggression against Ukraine.
Ministers reaffirmed their determination that Iran must never   develop a nuclear weapon, noting that the ongoing escalation of its   nuclear programme has no credible civilian justification.
Ministers expressed continued concern over the human rights   situation in Iran, particularly the repression of political opposition   and the persecution of women, girls and minority groups. They called on   Iran to cease its unacceptable targeting of individuals, including   journalists and dissidents outside the country.
Ministers voiced support for the people of Syria and reiterated   the importance of an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political   transition process in the spirit of the principles of UN Security   Council Resolution 2254. Ministers called on all parties to preserve   Syria's territorial integrity and national unity and respect its   independence and sovereignty.
Ministers expressed serious concern regarding the intensification   of dangerous and destabilising behaviour by China's vessels in the   South China Sea, including towards Philippine and Vietnamese vessels and   crew. Ministers opposed any coercive or destabilising activities,   agreeing that this behaviour has endangered lives and created risks of   miscalculation and escalation. Ministers called for adherence to   international law, particularly UNCLOS, to ensure peace, security and   prosperity in the South China Sea. They called on all states to refrain   from the militarisation of disputed features, the dangerous use of   coastguard vessels and maritime militia, and efforts to disrupt other   states' lawful offshore resource development. Ministers also expressed   serious concerns about the situation in the East China Sea.
Ministers reaffirmed that the 2016 South China Sea Arbitral   Tribunal decision is final and binding on the parties. Ministers also   emphasised that any Code of Conduct on the South China Sea must fully   accord with international law, particularly UNCLOS, not prejudice the   rights or interests of States under international law and not undermine   existing inclusive regional architecture. Ministers confirmed their   resolve to work together, and with partners, to support states' rights   and freedoms in the South China Sea, consistent with UNCLOS, including   freedom of navigation and overflight.
Ministers underscored the critical importance of peace and   stability across the Taiwan Strait. They emphasised that differences   should be resolved peacefully and not through the threat or use of force   or coercion; and reaffirmed their shared opposition to unilateral   changes to the status quo. They recognised that the international   community benefits from the expertise of the people of Taiwan and   committed to working together to support Taiwan's meaningful   participation in international organisations, as a member where   statehood is not a prerequisite or as an observer or guest where it   is. They reiterated their will to continue deepening relations with   Taiwan in the economic, trade, scientific, technological and cultural   fields.
Ministers expressed serious concerns about human rights   violations in China, including the persecution and arbitrary detention   of Uyghurs and Tibetans and the erosion of their religious, cultural,   educational and linguistic rights and freedoms.
Ministers recognised both the UK and Australia have extensive and   enduring connections to Hong Kong. Ministers called for an end to   British National Jimmy Lai's prosecution in Hong Kong and for his   immediate release. Ministers agreed that the imposition of the National   Security Law on Hong Kong has significantly eroded the rights and   freedoms of Hong Kongers, a situation that has worsened with the   enactment of the Safeguarding National Security Ordinance in March 2024.   Ministers shared their grave concern at the sentences handed down for   members of the NSL47, including Australian citizen Gordon Ng, repeated   their call for the repeal of the National Security Law and called for   the release of Mr Ng.
Ministers strongly condemned the DPRK's provocative and   escalatory actions which pose a serious threat to international peace   and security. Ministers called on the DPRK to abandon its weapons of   mass destruction, ballistic missiles and malicious cyber programmes   which are deeply damaging for peace and security on the Korean Peninsula   and wider region. Ministers urged the DPRK regime to return to talks   and work towards peace on the peninsula. Ministers expressed grave   concerns over human rights violations in DPRK.
Ministers expressed their ongoing concern over foreign   information manipulation and interference, which threaten democratic   values, human rights and political stability. They agreed the UK and   Australia would continue working together to promote healthy, open and   fact-based environments.
Ministers agreed to continue coordination on strategic cyber   deterrence, including use of attributions and sanctions to impose costs   on malicious cyber actors and disrupt irresponsible behaviour in   cyberspace. Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to further expand   cooperation on digital governance to preserve and promote a   multistakeholder model through the implementation of the UN's Global   Digital Compact and in the forthcoming 20-year review of the World   Summit on the Information Society. Ministers committed to further expand   cooperation and coordination on cyber security capacity building and   cyber incident response in the Indo-Pacific, in coordination with key   partners.
Ministers agreed to deepen joint engagement on targeted   sanctions, including their enforcement through enhanced information   exchange. Ministers reiterated their intention to support more effective   UK-Australia sanctions counter-circumvention efforts across the   Indo-Pacific. They welcomed Australia's recent endorsement of the Call   to Action on Russia's 'shadow fleet'.
Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to working together, and   with regional countries, to ensure an open, peaceful, stable and   prosperous Indo-Pacific where sovereignty and international rules and   norms are upheld. They emphasised the importance of responsible   management of strategic competition, and the need for all countries to   commit anew to promoting dialogue and practical measures to reduce risks   of miscalculation, escalation and conflict. Ministers agreed the UK's   enduring engagement in the Indo-Pacific was important to strategic   balance in the region.
Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to ASEAN centrality. They   agreed on the importance of the ASEAN-led regional architecture in   protecting peace and stability and promoting secure and resilient   growth. Ministers maintained their commitment to supporting the   practical implementation of the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific across   maritime cooperation, connectivity, the SDGs and economic cooperation.
Ministers affirmed both countries' commitment to deepen and   diversify economic ties with Southeast Asian countries, including   through the UK's enhanced economic engagement and Invested: Australia's   Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040 and Australia's AUD 2 billion   Southeast Asian Investment Financing Facility. Ministers recognised the   progress made on enhanced development collaboration in Southeast Asia,   including on sustainable infrastructure. Ministers agreed to further   strengthen coordination, including in the Mekong subregion, noting   alignment and existing cooperation in areas such as blended and other   financing, for the clean energy transition. They agreed to jointly work   on increasing private capital mobilisation, including by developing   approaches to standardise blended finance products.
Ministers agreed to cooperate on digital development in the   Indo-Pacific, including through coordinated programming, sharing   information and lessons learned. In particular, the UK will share   learnings from its work on last-mile connectivity and digital literacy   in underserved communities, complementing Australia's significant   investments in undersea cables, and other forms of ICT infrastructure.   Ministers committed to working with AI for Development partners to   support the safe adoption and use of AI in the Indo-Pacific.
Ministers reiterated their deep concern at the deteriorating   political and security situation, and the worsening humanitarian crisis   in Myanmar, including military airstrikes against civilians, and the   grave impact on the people of Myanmar and neighbouring countries.   Ministers welcomed the October ASEAN Leaders' Statement and supported   enhanced cooperation between ASEAN and the UN in addressing the Myanmar   crisis. Ministers urged the military regime to implement the ASEAN   Five-Point Consensus, immediately cease all violence, release all those   unjustly detained, allow safe and unimpeded access for the delivery of   humanitarian assistance and return Myanmar to a civilian-led democracy,   through genuine, inclusive dialogue. Ministers urged all parties to   prioritise the protection of civilians.
Ministers reiterated their commitment to working with Pacific   island countries through existing regional architecture, recognising the   centrality of the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF). They emphasised the   importance of pursuing engagement that reflects Pacific priorities,   guided by the PIF's 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. They   committed to enhanced cooperation on Pacific climate finance, including   through the Green Climate Fund and Global Environment Facility, to   continue to work together in the establishment of the Pacific Resilience   Facility, a Pacific priority, and to increase coordination to improve   the coherence and quality of climate technical assistance deployed in   Pacific Island countries. Australia welcomed just under ÂŁ1M of UK   funding for tackling illicit finance and enhancing financial inclusion   in the Pacific.
Ministers welcomed the UK's endorsement of the Pacific Quality   Infrastructure Principles and agreed to work together to advance   transparent and high-quality development in line with the principles,   including with multilateral development banks. They recognised the value   of engaging the private sector to lift infrastructure quality in line   with the principles, including through the Pacific Business Club.   Ministers reaffirmed the importance of supporting Pacific-led approaches   to building national and regional disaster readiness, such as the   Pacific Humanitarian Warehousing Program, and agreed to identify   opportunities to work together on disaster risk financing in the   Pacific.
Ministers agreed to continue enhancing interoperability with the   militaries of the Pacific through continued engagement in bilateral and   regional exercises, and as guided by the priorities of Pacific partners.   Supporting Australia's Pacific Maritime Security Program, and in   partnership with the Royal Australian Navy Sea Training Group, the Royal   Navy will offer tailored maritime training support at the request of   Pacific island partners. The partnership will offer the expertise of the   Royal Navy's forward deployed Offshore Patrol Vessel crews.
Ministers agreed to formalising the UK-Australia Maritime   Security Dialogue, to be held annually. Ministers committed to future   hydrography cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, including the launch of the   Hydrography Leaders Programme for the Southwest Pacific in December   2024.
Ministers also agreed to continue collaboration on shared   priorities in the Indian Ocean including maritime security. They   reiterated their commitment to the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA)   as the premier ministerial-level forum in the Indian Ocean region and to   continue exploring opportunities to collaborate in IORA.
Ministers reaffirmed their enduring commitment to the AUKUS   partnership, which is strengthening peace and stability in the   Indo-Pacific, and pledged to ensure it fulfils its security potential,   as well as delivering economic benefits. They welcomed strong progress   made by all AUKUS partners to support Australia's acquisition of a   conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarine capability, including   significant work underway to deliver SSN-AUKUS, which both Australia and   the UK will build and operate. Ministers reaffirmed the UK's commitment   to increase conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarine port visits   to Australia from 2026, and, as early as 2027, establish a rotational   presence of one UK Astute class submarine as part of Submarine   Rotational Force-West at HMAS Stirling.
Ministers acknowledged efforts to support the growth and   resilience of the UK and Australian submarine industrial bases. They   recognised the significance of the mobilisation agreement signed last   month between the Australian Submarine Agency (ASA), BAE Systems   Australia Submarines Pty Ltd and ASC SSN AUKUS Pty Ltd which will ensure   work to build Australia's SSN-AUKUS submarines can commence as quickly   as possible. They welcomed the announcement of the first Tasking   Statements contracted underneath the tripartite mobilisation agreement   on 16 December 2024, enabling the ASA, BAE Systems Australia Submarines   Pty Ltd and ASC SSN-AUKUS Pty Ltd to work together to develop detailed   plans, schedules and workforce initiatives for the Australian build   program of the SSN-AUKUS nuclear-powered submarine. Ministers also   welcomed the wide range of initiatives to deliver a more resilient and   prosperous trilateral submarine supply chain in the UK and Australia,   particularly including the initiation of the UK-focused effort under the   AUKUS Defence Industry Vendor Qualification program.
Ministers welcomed the significant progress made during the first   round of negotiations on the Australia-UK AUKUS Pillar I Treaty, which   occurred in London in November 2024. The Treaty will establish the   strategic and operational framework to implement the AUKUS Optimal   Pathway and joint delivery of SSN-AUKUS. They acknowledged the vital   role of the Treaty in demonstrating our shared interest in promoting a   peaceful, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific. Ministers welcomed the   formation of the SSN-AUKUS Programme Interface Office within the   Submarine Delivery Agency, which will coordinate and integrate the   sovereign UK and Australian SSN-AUKUS programmes and supply chains.
Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to setting the highest   non-proliferation standard for Australia's acquisition of conventionally   armed, nuclear-powered submarines and welcomed the 15 November 2024   report by the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency   on Australia's naval nuclear propulsion program, which acknowledged the   active engagement by AUKUS partners with the IAEA.
Ministers hailed continued progress under AUKUS Pillar II and   reiterated the imperative of Pillar II to accelerate the delivery of   advanced military capabilities. Ministers acknowledged the strengthening   of undersea warfare capabilities and maritime autonomy as well as   further strides in quantum technologies, cyber capabilities,   hypersonics, counter-hypersonics, artificial intelligence and electronic   warfare. Ministers noted ongoing consultations with Japan, Canada, New   Zealand, and the Republic of Korea to identify possibilities for   collaboration on advanced capabilities projects under AUKUS Pillar II on   a project to project basis.
Ministers recognised the momentous amendments to AUKUS partners'   respective export control regimes, facilitating billions of dollars of   licence-free defence trade and maximising innovation across the full   breadth of our defence collaboration while mutually strengthening our   defence industrial bases. The Ministers reiterated the importance of   implementation and the need to continue to progress efforts to   streamline defence trade.
Ministers welcomed commitment to further enhance the UK-Australia   strategic underwater warfare relationship outside of, and alongside   AUKUS. Australia welcomed the UK's decision to transfer system knowledge   and information on the S2087 towed array sonar for the first time with   another nation. Ministers acknowledged the transfer and operation of   this world-leading capability would further enhance interoperability and   interchangeability of the UK and Australia's Type 26 and Hunter Class   Frigate programmes. Ministers also agreed to deepen maritime   co-operation on autonomous systems.
Ministers welcomed progress through 2024 to further modernise the   defence relationship, and looked forward to the entry into force of the   updated Agreement between the Government of Australia and the   Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland   for Defence and Security Cooperation. They welcomed agreement to the   terms of reference for new operational level joint staff talks, building   on an already deep relationship between operational headquarters. The   first of these talks will take place in early 2025. Ministers further   welcomed the confirmation by the UK of an ongoing contribution to the   Combined Intelligence Centre-Australia within Australia's Defence   Intelligence Organisation. Ministers agreed to explore enhanced   collaboration on Land Mobility Platforms, including opportunities for   shared production and sustainment. Ministers also committed to work more   closely together bilaterally on defence innovation, including by   leveraging our respective expertise in quantum.
Ministers acknowledged significant levels of exercise activity   throughout 2024, and committed to retain a regular tempo of UK   participation in major Australian hosted multi-national exercises. More   than 400 UK Commandos deployed to Australia for Exercise PREDATORS RUN,   alongside the United States and the Philippines. The UK also contributed   fast jets and refuelling and cargo aircraft to the largest ever   Exercise PITCH BLACK in August 2024, having transited from Europe as   part of an Anglo-French combined air group. Ministers agreed to explore   enhanced collaboration on Land Mobility Platforms, including exploring   opportunities for shared production and sustainment.
Ministers acknowledged significant levels of exercise activity   throughout 2024, and committed to retain a regular tempo of UK   participation in major Australian hosted multi-national exercises in the   future. Recognising the UK's deep experience in conducting amphibious   operations, they welcomed opportunities for the UK to share lessons and   experience to help with Australia's transformation of its Army into a   more amphibious-capable land force, as directed by the Australian   National Defence Strategy. Building upon UK participation in Exercise   PREDATOR'S RUN 2024, Ministers agreed to further enhance   interoperability between UK and Australian amphibious and littoral   forces, including through participation in Exercise TALISMAN SABRE 2025.
They announced an ambitious level of UK-Australian integration in   the 2025 deployment of the UK-led multi-national Carrier Strike Group   (CSG), which will see interaction and support with Royal Australian Navy   units, aircraft from the Royal Australian Air Force, alongside support   in the space and cyber components. Ministers highlighted the CSG's   participation in Exercise TALISMAN SABRE as a high point for engagement,   providing critical opportunities to test high-end warfighting   capabilities with UK force elements spanning the breadth of the UK   Defence enterprise. Ministers welcomed an Australian port visit by the   HMS Prince of Wales, the first ever by a Queen Elizabeth-class carrier, a   milestone presenting further opportunities for engagement.
Ministers reaffirmed their nations' continued investment in the   Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) as a unique multilateral   arrangement that plays a constructive role in enhancing regional peace   and security. They noted continuous enhancements and complexity of FPDA   exercises, and welcomed opportunities to incorporate elements of the CSG   in exercise serials in 2025.
Ministers reaffirmed the importance of the multilateral system   and the international rules, norms and standards that all countries   agree, to protect the world's peoples and the sovereignty of all   nations. They reaffirmed the Pact for the Future and its accompanying   annexes, as a testament to the collective determination, even in   challenging times, to ensure the multilateral system meets contemporary   needs and expectations. Ministers committed to working together in   shaping multilateral reform for the betterment of all states' security,   and prosperity, and respect for universal human rights.
Ministers emphasised the importance and centrality of the   Sustainable Development Goals for peace and prosperity for people and   the planet. They agreed to work closely toward a strong set of outcomes   for developing country partners at the UN's fourth International   Conference on Financing for Development in 2025, including advocating to   reform International Financial Institutions, standardising blended and   private finance approaches, and strengthening development effectiveness.
Ministers underlined their commitment to the full implementation   of the Women, Peace and Security agenda, as we approach the 25th   anniversary of UN Security Council Resolution 1325 in 2025, and agreed   to continue to work together, including as members of the International   Alliance on the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative.
Ministers reiterated their determination to pursue a new   Declaration for the Protection of Humanitarian Personnel, to galvanise   political commitment to take action and amplify calls for full   compliance with international humanitarian law. They expressed grave   concern that 2024 is the deadliest year on record for humanitarian   personnel with an increasing number killed in Gaza, Sudan, South Sudan,   Ukraine and elsewhere. They committed to advocate at the highest level   and to take practical action to reverse the current trend.
Ministers congratulated Samoa on hosting a successful   Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), the first hosted by a   Pacific island country.  They reaffirmed their collective ambition to   progress shared commitments agreed at CHOGM, including helping small and   vulnerable states to meet the impacts of climate change, action to   protect and manage our ocean, empowering young people with access to   education and skills, and boosting intra-Commonwealth trade and   investment. Ministers reaffirmed their vision for a revitalised   Commonwealth and expressed their shared commitment to working with the   next Secretary-General and Samoa as Chair-in-Office to pursue the   ongoing institutional reform process.
Ministers committed to drive sustained economic growth via the UK   and Australia's diplomatic and trading relationship. They reaffirmed   the importance of the rules-based multilateral trading system, with the   World Trade Organization (WTO) at its core, to economic security and   prosperity. They agreed to continue working together to advance   necessary reforms of the WTO to better equip the Organization to address   global trade challenges, including by restoring a fully functioning   dispute settlement system as soon as possible.
Ministers welcomed the UK's accession to CPTPP, with the   agreement entering into force between the UK and the nine of the 11   CPTPP parties, including Australia, in December 2024. Ministers agreed   that this strengthened our countries' already close trading relationship   and further bolsters CPTPP as the "gold standard" agreement of global   significance. Ministers welcomed members commitment to working together   to take forward the General Review in order to maintain CPTPP's status   as the standard-bearer for trade agreements. Ministers also welcomed the   decision taken by CPTPP Members on 28 November to establish an   Accession Working Group for Costa Rica.
Ministers welcomed the strong trading relationship between the UK   and Australia, which is underpinned by the Australia-UK Free Trade   Agreement. High rates of utilisation and strong business engagement are   signals that the agreement is creating new export opportunities and   delivering benefits to Australian and UK businesses. Ministers welcomed   the Australia-UK Free Trade Agreement Strategic Innovation Dialogue held   in April and the second Strategic Dialogue on Gender Equality to take   place in 2025, along with ongoing work to promote skills exchange and   trade in professional services.
Ministers welcomed the signing of the new ambitious UK-Australia   Climate and Energy Partnership at COP29. They committed to enhancing   bilateral cooperation on climate and energy, supporting both partners'   ambition to play significant roles in the global clean energy   transition, pave the way for new clean energy industries and technology,   create new job opportunities, and revitalise each nation's industrial   base.
Ministers welcomed agreements reached at COP29 on a new climate   finance goal and on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, establishing the   building blocks that set out how carbon markets will operate. They   agreed that more needs to be done to take forward the outcomes of the   Global Stocktake agreed at COP28 on transitioning away from fossil fuels   in energy systems and the call for ambitious, economy wide Nationally   Determined Contributions, covering all greenhouse gases, sectors, and   categories, and aligned with limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees.   Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to the Call to Action for No New   Coal in national climate plans. The UK reaffirmed its support for   Australia to host COP31 in 2026 in partnership with the Pacific.
Ministers acknowledged the practical collaboration and commitment   to lead innovation in clean energy technologies under the Australia-UK   Renewable Hydrogen Innovation Partnership. Ministers welcomed the   announcement of the twelve grant recipients, supporting six cutting-edge   projects which will drive advances in industrial and transport   decarbonisation.
Ministers recognised the role critical minerals play in meeting   our Net Zero commitments and energy transition ambitions, and the need   for diverse, resilient and sustainable supply chains. Ministers agreed   to further our cooperation, including to support critical mineral   projects and specific business-to-business engagement through the   existing Joint Working Group under our joint Statement of   Intent. Ministers also reaffirmed their commitment to the promotion of   high environmental and social governance standards for critical   minerals.
Ministers welcomed announcement of the UK-Australian Offshore   Infrastructure Decommissioning Partnership on 9 December, which will   support greater collaboration and investment flows between our two   countries on offshore oil and gas decommissioning.


