The Federal Government is taking significant steps to improve the aviation sector by developing Sustainable Aviation Fuel, Low Carbon Aviation Fuel and other cleaner energy sources.
The aviation sector is collaborating with the European Aviation Safety Agency to adopt sustainable aviation fuel and other cleaner energy sources.
The Minister of Aviation and Aerospace Development, Festus Keyamo, said this at the second consultative stakeholders’ engagement on developing and deploying SAF, LCAF and other cleaner fuels on Monday.
Keyamo stated that multiple technical analyses have shown sustainable aviation fuel holds the greatest potential for reducing emissions in international aviation.
The minister, represented by the Director General of the Nigeria Civil Aviation Authority, Chris Najomo said, “The federal government, under the leadership of His Excellency, President Bola Ahmed Tinubu has placed aviation at the centre of its National Economic Development and is committed to the global agenda of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and transitioning to cleaner energy sources.
“Our nation recognizes the potential of SAF, LCAF, and Geaner energy alternatives to not only reduce emissions but also stimulate economic growth, create jobs, and build a resilient energy sector. We are forging a strategic partnership that will not only benefit the aviation sector in Nigeria but also contribute to the global efforts toward reducing the carbon footprint of air travel.
“The aviation sector, through NCAA, is glad to collaborate with the National Council on Climate Change which is the National Designated Authority and official focal point working to address the impacts of climate change in Nigeria. The minister elaborated that the partnership with EASA will help Nigeria create a roadmap for cleaner energy in aviation, in line with the International Civil Aviation Organisation’s goals to minimise the environmental impact of civil aviation.”
He added, “This meeting is borne out of the desire for Nigeria to develop a clear roadmap and set targets for the use of cleaner energy in aviation.
“This meeting is therefore important, not just for coordination and collaboration among all stakeholders in the aviation and energy sectors, including government agencies, industry players, civil society, academia, and international partners, but also to raise public awareness on the benefits and opportunities of cleaner energy transition for aviation, as well as the challenges and risks of inaction.
“This collaboration is the only way to facilitate the development and deployment of aviation cleaner energies in Nigeria and ensure that the country is not left behind in aviation environmental protection initiatives.”
Najomo, echoed the importance of SAF, stating, “Sustainable aviation fuel, that’s where we’re heading for. And we had our first meeting sometime last year, and this is the second meeting we’re having to collaborate more.”
He acknowledged that while feedstocks for SAF have not yet been identified, collaborations with agencies like the National Council on Climate Change are helping move the project forward.
Najomo also emphasised the potential cost savings and environmental benefits of SAF.
“Once we identify what stocks we’ll use, we’ll take it from there. Because of the situation where we are, that we have enough feedstocks, it will be better. And of course, that will eventually, hopefully, bring down everything. It might be a lot cheaper but the most important thing is cleaner fuel.”
Also present was the NCAA Director of Public Affairs and Consumer Protection, Michael Achimugu, who praised the minister’s leadership and commitment to advancing Nigeria’s aviation sector, noting Keyamo’s legal background as an asset.
“When the Honorable Minister was appointed, a lot of questions were asked—why a lawyer? But with someone committed to success and driving the ambition of Mr. President, no better person to lead that drive than a lawyer who knows his onions,” Achimugu said.