The National Agricultural Development Fund has partnered with the National Agricultural Seed Council to promote six priority crops across the country.
The partnership was announced by the Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Security, Senator Aliyu Abdullahi on Wednesday during a two-day workshop on Enhancing Seed Systems for Sustainable Agriculture and Food Security in Nigeria.
The workshop, organised by NADF in collaboration with NASC, was attended by key stakeholders in the agricultural sector.
According to the minister, the integration of modern seed technology is crucial in countering the threats posed by climate change on Nigeria’s food systems.
“We are witnessing the clear and present existential threats of climate change and its impact on our local food systems,” he emphasised.
“It is evident that climate change is real, and it has therefore become inevitable to integrate modern seed technology to ensure sustainability and food security,” added.
The minister also commended NADF for its leadership in addressing the challenges facing Nigeria’s seed system, including poor distribution channels and inadequate infrastructure.
“The National Agricultural Development Fund is commended for taking the bull by the horns in addressing critical issues hampering our agricultural development,” he said.
The Executive Secretary of NADF, Mohammed Ibrahim, explained that “the six priority crops – maize, rice, cowpeas, cassava, millet, and oil palm – are staples in different geopolitical zones in Nigeria and are crucial for achieving food security in the country.”
“Through the Seed Systems Enhancement Programme, we aim to provide financial support to drive this transformation,” he said.
The Acting Director-General of NASC, Dr Ishiak Khalid, emphasised the need for the private sector to be more organized in supporting the government’s policies to strengthen the seed sector.
“As the private sector, we need to be more organized to give life to the beautiful policies and shun any kind of circumvention that may collapse the system,” he said.