The President-General of the Apex Association of Anioma Indigenes, Mr Patrick Nwanze, has called for enhanced and greater unity between the South-East and South-South geo-political regions to preserve and promote cultural heritage.
Nwanze said this at the South-South/South-East Culture, Heritage, Tourism, and Business Summit held in Asaba, the Delta State capital on Sunday, raising concern over the erosion of traditional values among Nigerian youth.
He said, “We call for greater unity between the South-East and South-South regions to preserve and promote cultural heritage.
“Our youth are drifting away from their cultural roots. This initiative aims to rekindle interest in our traditions so that the next generation will appreciate and preserve our values.
“Ultimately, we want to elevate our heritage to a level where it is celebrated annually with pride and passed on seamlessly. Initially, this initiative began on a smaller scale as a culture project.
“Recognising its potential, we expanded its scope with support from the Delta State Ministry of Culture and the Commissioner for Tourism. Today’s summit is a precursor to a larger cultural gathering planned for early next year.”
In his address, the Chairman of the occasion, Mr Ebenezer Okorodudu, emphasised the dual role of cultural preservation and economic growth.
Okorodudu said, “Our cultural identity is our compass.
“By promoting traditional arts, music, and languages, we are not only preserving our heritage but also creating opportunities for economic empowerment.
“Events like this can bridge gaps, guide the younger generation, and inspire innovative ways to turn cultural assets into profitable ventures.
“In today’s world, where dominant cultures threaten to erase weaker ones, we must adopt a business-oriented approach and effective communication to safeguard our heritage. To preserve our cultural identity, we must develop our local languages, encourage our traditional arts and music that showcase our unique identity, and leverage our cultural heritage as a valuable business resource.”
In a keynote address, the Special Adviser to the Administrator of the Presidential Amnesty Programme, Juan Governor, said extreme weather events, such as flooding, threaten cultural sites, undermining efforts to protect our heritage.
The Delta State governor, represented by Cynthia Governor, discussed the intersection of climate change and cultural preservation, insisting that policies must address these challenges to ensure our cultural identity is safeguarded for future generations.
She said, “Extreme weather events, such as flooding, threaten cultural sites, undermining efforts to protect our heritage. Policies must address these challenges to ensure our cultural identity is safeguarded for future generations.
“We must educate our youth on the significance of heritage sites and mobilise families, NGOs, and traditional leaders to protect them.”
The event brought together cultural enthusiasts, government representatives, and stakeholders, to discuss strategies for cultural preservation and economic empowerment.
