President Cyril Ramaphosa has disclosed that South Africa will “keenly” support the bid of Nigeria, “a valued sister country,” to become a member of the G20 club of the world’s major economies.
Ramaphosa gave the promise at the official launch of South Africa’s presidency of the G20 in Cape Town, few minutes before he received President Tinubu at Tuynhuys to co-chair the 11th Bi-National Commission between Nigeria and South Africa in Cape Town on Tuesday.
Tinubu’s Special Adviser on Information and Strategy, Mr. Bayo Onanuga, revealed this in a statement he signed on Wednesday titled ‘South Africa eyes Nigeria’s lithium for electric vehicle revolution, backs Nigeria’s bid to join G20.’
The South African leader reiterated this stance during his tete-a-tete with President Tinubu and the expanded meeting with officials of both countries at the BNC.
The G20, or Group of Twenty, is a premier international forum for economic cooperation, bringing together the world’s major advanced and emerging economies.
Established in 1999, it comprises 19 individual countries and the European Union, representing about 85 per cent of global GDP, 75 per cent of international trade, and two-thirds of the global population.
In 2023, the African Union was granted permanent membership. South Africa and the AU are Africa’s only representatives in the G20.
The group addresses critical global issues, including economic growth, financial stability, climate change, sustainable development, and trade.
G20 summits are attended by heads of state, finance ministers, and central bank governors, fostering dialogue and coordinated action.
The presidency rotates annually among its members, with the host country setting the agenda and priorities for that year.
South Africa currently holds the presidency of the G20.
Consequently, its support for Nigeria’s membership in the bloc is crucial.
Ramaphosa said other key African countries should also be admitted to the club “so that we can raise the voice from Africa, the neglected continent for the longest time.”
He noted that South Africa had been the lone voice for Africa in the G20 before the admission of the African Union last year after his country had lobbied for it to become a member.
“We have a voice, we have a presence, and we will be the biggest growth story in years to come.
“Our population is going to grow in leaps and bounds, and, therefore, as a continent, we are going to be a big noise, and we want that big noise to be recognised in the form of countries that will be part of the G20 right now,” he said at the official launch of the G20 presidency.
Meanwhile, Nigeria and South Africa have fully operationalised the Joint Ministerial Advisory Council on Industry, Trade and Investment to enhance economic cooperation between the two leading African economies.
President Ramaphosa disclosed the decision on Tuesday in Cape Town, South Africa, at the Nigeria-South Africa Business Roundtable.
The Special Adviser on Information and Strategy to President Bola Tinubu, Mr. Bayo Onanuga, revealed this in a statement he signed on Wednesday titled ‘Nigeria, South Africa operationalise advisory council to boost trade and investment.’
At the roundtable, President Tinubu assured Ramaphosa that Nigeria was open for business and ready to provide stability, security and the rule of law for businesses to thrive.
At the event, attended by business leaders, government officials and trade stakeholders, Tinubu also expressed commitment to address issues discouraging South African investors from growing their businesses and franchises in Nigeria and called on South Africa to reciprocate by allowing Nigerian companies to operate and flourish in South Africa.
He affirmed that Nigerian officials would continue collaborating with their South African counterparts to facilitate the implementation of the agreed mandates under the Bi-National Commission.
“Nigeria and South Africa are co-joined twins tied by the hips not only for survival but for the prosperity of the people,” he noted.
Tinubu said Nigeria was undergoing very stringent positive economic reforms to serve the people of Nigeria and bring prosperity to Africa.
“The reforms have begun to see the light of the day. You have no better investment than in Nigeria. You cannot earn better on your investments elsewhere except in Nigeria,” he said.
President Ramaphosa recalled that the Joint Ministerial Advisory Council on Trade was launched during his State Visit to Nigeria in 2021.
It aimed to address trade and investment challenges, foster policy alignment, and create a conducive environment for business growth in both countries.
He said, “Today, we agreed on the full operationalisation of the council. This will support a conducive environment for improved trade and investment.
