Sweet potatoes are a very versatile tuber. You can roast them. You can bake them into a pie. You can turn them into the third best type of french fry. And apparently, you can make them an integral part of colonizing Polynesian islands.
Sweet potatoes are not indigenous to Polynesia, having arisen thousands of miles away in Central and South America. Even so, the tasty root vegetable has become a staple of the islands’ cuisine. While it was known that the crop had arrived in eastern Polynesia some time after human settlement in 900 CE, and then spread westward towards New Zealand, scientists have debated exactly how and when it got there. Some evidence suggests sweet potato seeds reached the region through natural means , such as birds, wind, and sea currents. Now, new research hints that the crop’s presence was a major factor in enabling human expansion across the Polynesian islands.
A team of archaeologists, led by University of Otago professor Ian Barber, scoured the New Zealand island Te Wāhipounamu for remains of ancient kūmara, as the Maori call sweet potatoes. They found what they were looking for at Triangle Flat, an area that was once home to a Maori farming complex. In the sand, they located sweet potato granules, which they then carbon dated.
Native Americans Voyaged to Polynesia Long Before Europeans Reached the Americas, DNA Study Shows
Results showed that the crop could have been planted as early as 1290 CE, over 100 years earlier than previously believed on the island, and around the same time that settlers first began colonizing the southernmost Polynesian islands. As Barber wrote in his ensuing study , published Wednesday in the journal Antiquity , the findings suggest sweet potatoes were among the first crops planted by colonizers. In fact, the availability of sweet potatoes as a crop may have been among the factors that made settling the islands possible in the first place.
The vegetable is known for its hardiness, as well as for the speed at which it grows. Polynesia is a vast network of over 1,000 islands, and settlers needed hardy crops to sustain themselves as they spread to new territories with cooler climates than those of islands nearer the equator. In a press release, Barber suggested that Polynesians may have been galvanized by the knowledge they had such a robust food source at their disposal.
“American sweet potato resilience, as bequeathed by continental evolution, may have helped motivate early migrants to cross cooler waters for southern Polynesian islands where kūmara would outperform,” he said.
There could be some greater impacts of Barber’s research. According to the International Potato Center, more than 105 million metric tons of the crop are produced globally each year, making it the world’s fifth largest crop. Climate change, however, threatens to affect production, as regions that produce a large amount of the supply could warm dramatically by 2070. Barber expressed hope that studying the spread of sweet potatoes could uncover new ways to improve the crop’s resilience. If that happens, you’ll know who to thank for saving your favorite Thanksgiving side dish.
Agriculture Crops maori polynesia sweet potatoes
Get the best tech, science, and culture news in your inbox daily.
News from the future, delivered to your present.
Please select your desired newsletters and submit your email to upgrade your inbox.
Food insecurity threatens billions, and the solution may lie in a plant cultivation technique far more efficient than nature.
The fungus ruining Cavendish banana crops is evolutionarily distinct from a similar disease that famously killed off the Gros Michel bananas.
A perfect storm of hurricanes, diseases, and water scarcity threatens to wipe out the state's famed citrus industry.
New research suggests that leafy greens grown on the ISS could be more prone to bacterial infections in space, exposing the crew to potential health risks.
Scientists relied on the principles of volcanic lightning to document a simple method for making better-tasting espresso.
Do you have a loved one who makes their morning joe like they’re on Iron Chef? Here are some tech-enabled gifts they can get a little jittery about.