Barcelona, Spain — Spanish authorities said Wednesday that at least 72 people have died after flash floods swept away cars, turned village streets into rivers and disrupted rail lines and highways in the worst natural disaster to hit the European nation in recent memory.
Emergency services in the eastern region of Valencia confirmed a death toll of 70 people on Wednesday. Another two casualties were reported in the neighboring Castilla La Mancha region.
The central government office for Castilla La Mancha region added that an 88-year-old woman was found dead in the city of Cuenca.
Spanish King Felipe VI said he is "devastated" by the flooding, Agence France-Presse reports.
Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez told victims the government "would not abandon" them, AFP says.
"All of Spain weeps with all of you. Our absolute priority is to help you. ... We won't abandon you," Sanchez said in a televised address.
Rainstorms on Tuesday caused flooding in a wide swath of southern and eastern Spain. Floods of mud-colored water tumbled vehicles down streets at frightening speeds. Pieces of wood swirled with household articles. Police and rescue services used helicopters to lift people from their homes and cars.
Authorities reported several missing people late Tuesday, but the following morning brought the shocking announcement of dozens found dead.
Parts of the Valencia region have no electricity and phone lines were down, and some areas were cut off by flooded roads, regional chief Carlos Mazon told reporters, according to AFP.
Over 1,000 soldiers from Spain's emergency response units were deployed to the devastated areas.
"Yesterday was the worst day of my life," Ricardo Gabaldón, the mayor of Utiel, a town in Valencia, told national broadcaster RTVE. He said several people were still missing in his town.
"We were trapped like rats. Cars and trash containers were flowing down the streets. The water was rising to three meters," he said.
Spain has experienced similar autumn storms in recent years, but nothing compared to the devastation over the last two days.
A high-speed train with nearly 300 people on board derailed near Malaga, although rail authorities said no one was hurt. High-speed train service between Valencia city and Madrid was interrupted, as were several commuter lines.
Valencian regional President Carlos Mazón urged people to stay at home so as not to complicate rescue efforts, with travel by road already difficult due to fallen trees and wrecked vehicles.
Spain's central government set up a crisis committee to help coordinate rescue efforts.
The rain had subsided in Valencia by late Wednesday morning but more storms were forecast through Thursday, according to Spain's national weather service.
Spain is still recovering from a severe drought earlier this year. Scientists say increased episodes of extreme weather are likely linked to climate change .