World Food Programme
31 October 2024
Acute food insecurity is set to increase in magnitude and severity in 22 countries and territories
ROME -- Acute   food insecurity is set to increase in both magnitude and severity   across 22 countries and territories, according to a new United Nations report .   The report warns that the spread of conflict, particularly in the   Middle East - coupled with climate and economic stressors - is pushing   millions of people to the brink. The report spotlights the regional   fallout from the crisis in Gaza which has seen Lebanon engulfed in   conflict and warns that the La Niña weather pattern could impact   climates through March 2025, threatening fragile food systems in already   vulnerable regions.
The   report draws attention to famine in the Zamzam camp in North Darfur and   famine risk in other areas of Sudan, the enduring risk of famine in   Palestine (Gaza Strip) and the catastrophic levels of acute food   insecurity in Haiti, Mali and South Sudan. It warns that without   immediate humanitarian action and concerted efforts to overcome severe   access constraints and resolve ongoing conflicts, further starvation and   death are likely.
The   report - 'Hunger Hotspots - FAO-WFP early warnings on acute food   insecurity' - issued today by the Food and Agriculture Organization of   the United Nations (FAO) and the United Nations World Food Programme   (WFP) calls for urgent humanitarian action to save lives and livelihoods   and prevent starvation and death in hotspots where acute hunger is at   high risk of worsening between November 2024 and May 2025.
In   total, 22 countries/territories are classified as "hunger hotspots",   where high levels of acute food insecurity are expected to further   deteriorate due to the combination of conflict, economic instability,   and climate shocks during the outlook period. Without immediate   intervention, including increased funding for food and livelihoods   assistance, hundreds of thousands more people are expected to face   starvation in the coming months.
"The   situation in the five hunger hotspots of highest concern is   catastrophic. People are experiencing an extreme lack of food and face   unprecedented enduring starvation fuelled by escalating conflicts,   climate crises and economic shocks. If we are to save lives and prevent   acute hunger and malnutrition, we urgently need a humanitarian   ceasefire, and to restore access to and availability of highly   nutritious food, including reactivating local food production. But this   alone is not enough; we need longer-term stability and food security.   Peace is a pre-requisite for food security. Without peace and stability,   farmers cannot grow food, harvest or sustain their livelihoods. Access   to nutritious food is not just a basic need - it is a fundamental human   right," said QU Dongyu, FAO Director-General.
"Worldwide,   conflicts are escalating, economic instability is rising, and climate   disasters are becoming the new norm. With more effective political and   financial support, humanitarians can and will continue to implement   proven and scalable solutions to address hunger and reduce needs over   the long term," said Cindy McCain, WFP Executive Director.
"It's   time for world leaders to step up and work with us to reach the   millions of people at risk of starvation - delivering diplomatic   solutions to conflicts, using their influence to enable humanitarians to   work safely, and mobilizing the resources and partnerships needed to   halt global hunger in its tracks," Director McCain added.
The   effects of the La Niña weather pattern, anticipated to impact global   climates from November 2024 through March 2025, are expected to further   exacerbate some of the food crises. While some areas may benefit from   improved agricultural conditions, La Niña is likely to cause devastating   floods in countries such as Nigeria and South Sudan, while potentially   contributing to dry conditions in Somalia, Kenya, and Ethiopian. These   extreme weather events threaten already fragile food systems, putting   millions at risk of hunger.
The   report stresses that early, targeted action is essential to prevent the   further deterioration of the crisis and avert mass hunger-related   mortality. FAO and WFP are urging world leaders to prioritize conflict   resolution, economic support, and climate adaptation measures to protect   the most vulnerable populations from the brink of famine.
Key Findings
According to the report, Palestine , the Sudan , South Sudan , Haiti and Mali remain at the highest alert level and require the most urgent   attention. Conflict is the primary driver of hunger in all these areas.   All hotspots of the highest concern have communities already facing or   at risk of famine or facing catastrophic conditions of acute food   insecurity.
Chad , Lebanon , Myanmar , Mozambique , Nigeria , the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen are   hotspots of very high concern, with a large number of people facing   critical acute food insecurity, coupled with worsening drivers that are   expected to further intensify life-threatening conditions in the coming   months.
Since the previous edition of the Hunger Hotspots report (June 2024), Kenya, Lesotho, Namibia and Niger have joined the list of hunger hotspots, alongside Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Malawi, Somalia, Zambia and Zimbabwe, where acute food insecurity is likely to deteriorate further during the outlook period.
Note to Editors
The   Hunger Hotspots report identifies areas where acute food insecurity is   likely increase during the outlook period. The hotspots are determined   through forward-looking analysis and selected through a consensus-based   process involving FAO and WFP field and technical teams, alongside   analysts specialized in conflict, economic risks and natural hazards.
The report is part of a US and EU funded suite of analytical products produced under the Global Network Against Food Crises ,   to enhance and coordinate the generation and sharing of evidence-based   information and analysis for preventing and addressing food crises.
This series also includes the recently published 2024 Global Report on Food Crises ,   which retroactively looks at the levels of acute food insecurity in   2023, in complement to the Hunger Hotspots which is a forward-looking   early warning analysis that provides decision makers with information   for planning and resource allocation.
The digital version of the report is also available at this link .

#                 #                   #

The   Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is a   specialized agency that leads international efforts to defeat hunger. It   aims at transforming agrifood systems, making them more efficient,   inclusive, resilient and sustainable for better production, better   nutrition, a better environment and a better life, leaving no-one   behind. FAO's goal is to achieve food security for all and make sure   that people have regular access to enough high-quality food to lead   active, healthy lives.

The   United Nations World Food Programme is the world's largest humanitarian   organization saving lives in emergencies and using food assistance to   build a pathway to peace, stability and prosperity for people recovering   from conflict, disasters and the impact of climate change.



