The Federal Government has reiterated its commitment to improving rural electrification through the provision of sustainable energy solutions.
The Managing Director of the Rural Electrification Agency, Abba Aliyu, made this known while inaugurating the 100kWp Solar Hybrid Mini Grid in the Uhuafor Nomeh community in Nkanu East Council Area of Enugu State.
Aliyu, represented by the Executive Director of the Rural Electrification Fund, Doris Uboh, stated that the project was executed by the REA through the federal government’s Rural Electrification Fund in line with transformative efforts to enhance rural electrification.
The project, he said, has the capacity to provide power to three other communities in Nomeh, namely Imeama, Amakabi, and Uhuorji.
“The solar power initiative is also in line with President Bola Tinubu’s Renewed Hope Agenda, as the REA has continued to strengthen collaborative engagements with state governments and deliver energy access solutions across communities nationwide.
“One of the critical sectors Tinubu prioritised upon assuming office is the power sector.
“The REF has aided the deployment of over 50 solar mini-grids nationwide, providing clean energy access to hundreds or thousands of Nigerians.
“In the last couple of months, the agency has been on a project inauguration tour, powering Nigeria one community at a time through the REF. I can confidently tell you that data has proven that sustainable, renewable energy is a leveler and a catalyst for growth, and the federal government, through the REA, is committed to doing more,” he said.
He added that the inauguration at Nomeh comes at a time when there is a strong call for action on promoting safe and sustainable energy solutions to mitigate the effects of climate change and reduce greenhouse emissions.
The managing director, while noting that the project would serve as a catalyst for social and economic growth in the community, explained that the technology was designed to have a transformative impact on the lives of the over 3,000 residents of the community.
“We therefore urge the men and women of this community to take charge, protect this facility, and utilise it productively to drive this community forward,” he appealed.
In his address, Enugu State Governor Peter Mbah said the project would not only bring light to Uhuafor and neighbouring areas but also symbolises hope, progress, and empowerment for rural communities across Enugu State.
Mbah, represented by his Special Adviser on Power, Mr Joe Anieke, stated that the project aligns with his administration’s agenda to foster innovation, improve rural infrastructure, and create a green, energy-sufficient Enugu.
“We owe gratitude to the REA for their unwavering commitment to bridging the energy gap in Nigeria, particularly in unserved and underserved communities.
“This project reflects our shared vision: to ensure that every community in Enugu State, regardless of its location, has access to clean, reliable, and affordable power.
“We expect the operators of this project to engage with the Enugu Electricity Regulatory Commission to ensure it operates within the laws and regulations of the state,” he said.
Presenting the project overview, the representative of Ochuvus Nigeria Limited, Mr Ginika Eronini, said the system comprises 256 solar panels, six inverters, and 26 battery banks, ensuring optimal performance and energy storage capabilities.
“Additionally, an internet-enabled monitoring device allows for real-time tracking of energy production and consumption, facilitating the assessment of the system’s overall performance and efficiency.
“Its average daily efficiency is 72 per cent, estimated to serve 10,000 residents,” he said.
Responding, the Traditional Ruler of Nomeh Untaeze, Lt. Col. Israel Mbah, represented by his spokesperson, Mr Uchenna Anyanwu, described the inauguration as a very special day for the people of the area.
The royal father said that with electricity, their women would now be able to carry out their day-to-day activities more effectively, and their men would be able to innovate and transform the community for the better.
According to him, their children will now be able to read at night using electricity instead of generators with harmful smoke, candles, or kerosene lamps.
While thanking the federal government, the REA, and Governor Mbah for initiating the project, he assured them that the community would protect and utilise the facility for the good of the people.
(NAN)