Samsung presents a panel discussion on responsible recycling initiatives across technology and ... [+] design sectors during Climate Week New York City on Tuesday, Sept. 20, 2022. in New York. (Ann-Sophie Fjello-Jensen/AP Images for Samsung)
The 2024 Climate Week NYC is taking place September 22 - 29 in New York City. The annual event is hosted by Climate Group and held in conjunction with the meeting of the United Nations General Assembly. It will gather international leaders from politics, business, and science to advocate for climate change reforms. The sessions will indicate the future of climate change policy and provide insight for business leaders as to future regulations.
The overall theme of the 2024 meeting is “It’s Time.” The programming is divided into four categories: The New Industrial Revolution; The Energy and Transportation Transition; Nature, Food Systems and Health; and Leadership and Green Growth. Each session is hosted by organizations and businesses throughout the city.
With over 600 sessions running simultaneously in person and via livestream , finding the right schedule can be difficult. Here are eight programs on the environmental, social, and governance that business leaders should watch.
From Compliance to Competitive Edge: Why ESG Reporting Matters for Your Business
September 19, 12:00 PM – 1:00PM EDT
Hosted by: CFGI
Theme: This webinar “will focus on why sustainability reporting is important and how it can impact consumer behavior, attract investors and help your business thrive in today’s market.”
Speakers: Olia Kalinina, Christopher Docherty
Format: Virtual
The Executive Series 2024 - The silver (and gold) lining: How leading companies are thinking beyond compliance and using ESG reporting to drive growth
September 23, 11:00 AM – 12:30 PM EDT
Hosted by: PwC, Climate Group
Theme: This event will ask what’s next for ESG reporting.
Format: In person
DEI: A Competitive Advantage for Sustainability
September 24, 4:00 PM – 4:30 PM EDT
Hosted by: The Nest Climate Campus
Theme: This event will address DEI and ESG backlash and the role of business in solving societal issues.
Speakers: Sandrine Bouttier Stref, Group Head of Corporate Social Responsibility, Sanofi; Ayana Nathan, Vice President, Healthcare, Siemens; Daryl Brewster, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Executives for Corporate Purpose (CECP)
Format: In person
Green Transition Policy and ESG: Global Perspectives and Chinese Practices
September 26, 8:00 AM – 10:10 AM EDT
Hosted by: TFSU-Grouphorse ESG Industrial College
Theme: This event will explore China’s ESG policies.
Speakers include: Li Yingying, President of Tianjin Foreign Studies University; Yu Jiang, Vice President of Tianjin Foreign Studies University, Co-chairman of TFSU-Grouphorse ESG Industrial College; Tang Xing, Co-chairman of TFSU-Grouphorse ESG Industrial College and Chairman of Grouphorse
Format: Virtual
Accelerating Change: Critical Actions for a Sustainable Global Supply Chain
September 26, 11:30 AM – 12:30 PM EDT
Hosted by: New York State Bar Association
Theme: This webinar will global supply chain’s urgent environmental challenges.
Speakers: Betty M. Huber, Corporate Partner & Global ESG Co-Chair at Latham & Watkins; Ryan Laddey, Lead ESG & Corporate Compliance Counsel at Ralph Lauren; Linda Kleftodimou Smith, Co-Chair of the ESG Committee, NYSBA; Vlada Gurvich, Law Fellow at the International Senior Lawyers Project; Gal Shargil-Yaari, Steering Committee Arison ESG Center Reichman University; Ben Rutledge, Business and Human Rights specialist RCP
Format: Virtual
Unlocking the ROI of Sustainability: Driving Value and Trust in the Transition to Innovation
September 26, 2:00 PM – 3:00PM EDT
Hosted by: Workiva
Theme: Addressing pressure on businesses by global regulators to deliver detailed sustainability reports.
Speakers: Mandi McReynolds, Tensie Whelan
Format: Virtual
Scope 3 Solutions for ESG and HR Leaders
September 27, 9:00 AM – 10:00 AM EDT
Hosted by: HearstLab, Planet FWD, Scope Zero
Theme: This event will address one of the most challenge aspects of corporate sustainability - scope 3 emissions.
Speakers include: Julia Collins, Planet FWD CEO; Lizzy Kolar, Scope Zero CEO
Format: In person
Digitalization for Good & ESG Reporting Standards - Bridging the Gap for a Sustainable Future
September 28, 3:00 PM – 7:00 PM EDT
Hosted by: UN Global Compact Network Finland, UN Global Compact Network France, UN Global Compact Network Sweden
Theme: This event will “delve into how digitization can drive positive change and how robust ESG reporting standards can ensure these changes are sustainable and accountable.”
Speakers: Ambassador Jarmo Sareva, Consul General of Finland in New York; Ville Tavio, Minister for Development Cooperation and Foreign Trade of Finland; Henri “Henkka” Hyppönen, Chief Inspiration Officer, Younite-AI; Anthony D’Arcy, Head of Sustainability Stakeholder Engagement and Enablement, Nokia; Andy Reed, VP, ICEYE.
Format: In person
