Apartments in Pacifica, California, hang from a cliff over the sea. Storms, powerful waves and sea ... [+] level rise are intensifying erosion on the U.S. West Coast.
The impacts of climate change could cost the real estate sector upward of half a trillion dollars by mid-century, Singapore's sovereign wealth fund has warned in a new report, released as Hurricane Helene bears down on Florida.
The research, from Singapore's GIC and S&P Global, shows that even under limited warming conditions, more powerful storms, along with more intense heatwaves and rainfall, were expected to cause $536 billion in damage, equivalent to 26% of total real estate asset value listed in S&P's Global REIT Index.
Under more rapid warming conditions, the report warns, climate impacts could cause in excess of $110 billion in real estate damage this decade, and $559 billion by 2050.
But no matter what path global warming takes, severe impacts on property are expected to worsen globally.
"The warming that is already embedded in the climate system means that physical risks are likely to increase over time, raising costs across the broader economy for customers, tenants, building operators, owners, and investors," author Wong De Rui and colleagues state. "This trend will likely accelerate as the window of opportunity to curb global warming narrows each year," they conclude.
Crucially, the researchers show, investing in solutions like greening roofs and floodproofing offered significant investment opportunities. They calculate that such investments could lower the costs of climate impacts by $45 billion by mid-century. Floodproofing could save $3.55 for every $1 invested, while greening roofs or adding cooling solutions could save $7.45 for every $1 invested.
For this reason, the report states, the demand for climate adaptation solutions could reach a value of $29 billion annually. The authors criticise existing risk models for failing to incorporate the value of adaptation, a situation that is "making it harder for investors to prioritise risk management."
However eye-opening GIC's calculations might be, they could be conservative. Earlier this year, Swiss reinsurance giant Swiss Re warned that the U.S. is sustaining losses of $97 billion every year , making it the country most exposed to climate change in financial terms.
The world's second-largest reinsurer noted that exposure to climate-fuelled catastrophes was causing insurers to raise their rates, or even to pull out of states, such as Florida , altogether.
The GIC report comes as Hurricane Helene approaches the U.S. southeast coast, with meteorologists warning that the storm is " particularly worrisome ". On Thursday, the National Weather Service warned that storm surges in Florida could be " catastrophic and unsurvivable ".
In May, Florida governor Ron DeSantis signed a bill that would remove most references to climate change from state law.