Climate is on the ballot this election season. The two presidential candidates offer vastly different scenarios for our planet’s future. Scientists have said another term led by Donald Trump, who has shopped his campaign to fossil fuel executives , would make America more reliant on energy sources that are heating up our planet at a catastrophic rate. Vice President Kamala Harris , meanwhile, has supported legislation that will provide billions in fighting the climate crisis and — while not perfect — offers citizens a platform to champion for lifesaving environmental protections.
With the race to the White House poised to come down to the wire in key battleground states, America’s favorite science guy Bill Nye took to social media to urge Americans to vote for climate and clean energy champions.
Wearing a powdered wig and evoking the U.S. Constitution, Nye underlined that Article I, Section 8, Clause 8, states Congress shall “promote the progress of science and useful arts.”
He elaborated that the country’s founders “saw the future and knew that science would be essential to it,” but that this election season, “One side is living in an imagined past world in which we can drill, scrape, and burn the coal and oil of ancient swamps without consequence.”
“They’re bent on ignoring science, blinded to the overwhelming evidence of climate change , fires, floods, disappearing, ice, hottest summers on record,” he continued, before urging: “Let’s do something. Let’s vote. Science isn’t partisan. It’s patriotic.”
A post shared by Bill Nye (@billnye)
Nye’s latest election efforts are part of a collaboration with Climate Power’s Too Hot Not To Vote campaign that aims to educate and motivate voters to choose candidates who support climate and clean energy. The famed activist has publicly endorsed the Harris-Walz ticket and encouraged voters to visit TooHotNotToVote.com where they can check their registration status and learn about different candidates’ climate records. Trending Vince and Linda McMahon Named in New ‘Ring Boy’ Sex Abuse Lawsuit Against WWE Fox Host Says Maybe Trump Didn’t Realize Hitler’s Generals Were Nazis Garth Brooks Submits Photos of Anonymous Rape Accuser as Evidence After Naming Her Graham Nash on Coming to Terms With David Crosby's Death, New CSNY Live Album
“The stakes for our planet have never been higher and we must elect leaders who prioritize science and sustainability,” said Nye in a statement to Rolling Stone . “Acknowledging that climate change is happening is essential to our future. In this election, let’s address the urgency of the crisis. Every single vote can drive meaningful change.”
The new campaign is co-chaired by Nye, Rosario Dawson, Sophia Bush, Jack Schlossberg, Misha Collins, Sierra Quitiquit, LaTricea Adams, Piper Perabo, and Pattie Gonia — industry leaders, celebrities, and influencers who have sought to galvanize voters through their 50 million followers across various social media platforms.