The Sombrero ground lizard, endemic to a tiny Caribbean island near Anguilla, is a critically endangered reptile. In 2018, it was estimated that fewer than 100 individuals of the species were left in the wild—it was on the very brink of extinction.
In 2021, Fauna & Flora and our partners Anguilla National Trust and Re:wild stepped in to help the Sombrero ground lizard and its island habitat to recover. Fast forward three years and results are already promising. A recent survey has revealed the population of the Sombrero ground lizard is now estimated at more than 1,600—a rapid recovery and an encouraging sign of hope for the future of the rare reptile.
"In 2018, following yet another severe hurricane, we feared it might be the end for the Sombrero ground lizard. Fewer than 100 were left and the island was in ruins. The past three years have seen painstaking restoration activity, with hands-on efforts by both our international partners and local conservation heroes to remove the invasive pests and restore natural plant cover—not an easy feat on such a remote and rocky island like Sombrero," says Farah Mukhida, executive director at Anguilla National Trust
While small, Sombrero Island is a globally important area for biodiversity and forms the heart of the Sombrero Island Marine Reserve. Several other extremely rare species are unique to the island, including the Sombrero Island bee, a pygmy gecko and the Sombrero Island wind scorpion, a harmless but fearsome-looking invertebrate. Sombrero also supports large seabird colonies and is designated as an Important Bird Area and a Ramsar Site.
Due to historical mining for phosphates, invasive mice and severe hurricanes, Sombrero Island was on the verge of ecological collapse. Completely deforested, it was hard to imagine this island used to have an endemic giant tortoise.
Since 2021, conservation efforts have focused on removing the invasive rodents and planting native species , and today Sombrero Island has been declared pest-free and is looking much greener and healthier than before efforts began. Reintroduced native plants such as sea bean, seagrape and prickly pear are already showing healthy new growth.
The restoration of Sombrero island is not just important for wildlife in the short term, but is key for building resilience to the impacts of climate change, ensuring nature can thrive in the long run too.
As climate change and its impacts become more acute, new threats to nature and people are emerging. Securing Sombrero and other Caribbean islands from the impacts of climate change—from wildfires to severe hurricanes—is becoming a growing challenge for our local team and partners.
Jenny Daltry, Caribbean Alliance Director, Fauna & Flora and Re:wild, who co-led the ground lizard surveys, explains, "This is a remarkable turnaround for this cheeky and charismatic lizard, but while we celebrate this recovery, we recognize that there is much more to be done to secure their future and that of other Caribbean wildlife.
"The combined impacts of biodiversity loss and climate breakdown are being felt with greater intensity every year in the Caribbean and around the world. Indeed, we are still busy helping our partners in Jamaica and St Vincent and the Grenadines to recover from the devastation wreaked by Hurricane Beryl earlier this year."
Arica Hill, Caribbean Lead, says, "The ecological restoration we have implemented on Sombrero, Redonda and many other islands across the Caribbean is important for establishing a more secure future for these islands and the many species and people that rely on them. Protecting and restoring healthy natural ecosystems is key to resilience to a changing climate."
Provided by Fauna & Flora