The Minister of Environment, Balarabe Lawal, has stated that the Agro-Climatic Resilience in Semi-Arid Landscapes project is crucial in addressing land degradation, food insecurity, among others.
Lawal spoke on Thursday in Abuja at the Endorsement and Validation of the First Phase of the Developed Strategic Catchment Management Plan by ACReSAL stakeholders.
ACReSAL is a World Bank-financed project that aims to address climate change and land degradation in Nigeria’s northern states.
The minister said that the ACReSAL project was environmentally friendly with a focus on three issues–food security, water supply and the environment.
“The project seeks to address land degradation, watershed, food security and all related issues to community development.
“This participatory approach ensures that our plans are not only technically sound but also socially acceptable and environmentally just.’’
Lawal said it was the first time Nigeria would develop a Strategic Catchment Management Plan of that magnitude starting with the Hadeija Jama’are which was selected first with the promise to restore the Nguru wetland.
“The SCMP would also create the platform and structure into which another set of 200 micro catchment management plans from the 19 participating states and the FCT will dovetail into,” he said.
The News Agency of Nigeria reports that the strategic action plan is set to be developed and implemented across six Nguru/riparian states of Bauchi, Borno, Jigawa, Kano, Plateau and Yobe.
On his part, Prof. Joseph Utsev, Minister of Water Resources and Sanitation, said that water was crucial in an era defined by rapid change, climate fluctuations, population shifts or technological advancements.
“These efforts not only safeguard our environment but also support our local economy by ensuring sustainable practices that can benefit agricultural, recreational and tourism activities.
“The Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation hereby wishes to endorse this SCMP of Hadejia-Jama’are with enthusiasm and a shared determination to protect and enhance our natural heritage,” he said.
Sen. Sabi Abdullahi, Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Security, said that the 19 northern states and the FCT, home to Nigeria’s most vulnerable semi-arid regions, had been direct beneficiaries of ACReSAL’s initiatives.
“This gathering is a testament to our shared commitment to enhancing agricultural productivity, combating desertification and fostering resilience in the face of climate change.
“Since the inception of ACReSAL, it has become a cornerstone in the ministry’s efforts to bolster the agricultural sector against climate-related challenges across communities,” Abdullahi said.
Malam Muhammad Yahaya Chairman of Northern Governors’ Forum said that SCMP played a crucial role in preventing and mitigating the effects of water scarcity, drought, and general land degradation.
“We are committed to ensuring the effective implementation of this integrated and participatory plan as the operating framework for projects across the participating states,” Yahaya said.
Gov. Umar Namadi of Jigawa commended the ACReSAL Project for its exceptional collaborative approach.
“The project’s focus on livelihood impact has been well-received,” he said.
He affirmed Jigawa ‘s acceptance of the SCMP endorsed by the ministers.
According to Namadi, the ACReSAL project’s success is linked to its effective leadership which enables it to positively impact the lives of the people.

(NAN)