Further consolidating on its role as a driver of socio-economic empowerment and sustainable development in Nigeria, Dangote Cement Plc has trained and graduated 46 solar energy installers and entrepreneurs.
The Plant Director of Dangote Cement Plc, Obajana, Azad Nawabuddin, said in a statement from the firm that the new graduates were ready to “shake up the nation” in the renewable energy sector of Nigeria’s economy.
Speaking at the graduation ceremony, which took place at the Dangote Academy, Obajana, Azad said the Group President, Aliko Dangote, was passionate about youth empowerment as it supports the government’s effort in the provision of jobs, noting that this training will support the provision of electricity in the communities and the country at large.
Azad, who was represented by the Head of the Production Department, John Gwong, described the training as a meal ticket, rare opportunity and futuristic.”
He said the programme was part of Dangote Cement’s Corporate Social Responsibility scheme.
Head of Social Performance Dangote Cement Plc, Mr Wakeel Olayiwola, who was represented by Mr Olusegun Olojede, said the solar energy experts and entrepreneurs would support the government in the provision of power supply to millions of Nigerians.
The General Manager of Community Affairs and Special Duties, Mr Ademola Adeyemi, said the empowerment scheme is a way of giving back to society, and that of the 46 beneficiaries, 27 are men, while 19 are women.
Adeyemi said the beneficiary communities in Kogi State are Obajana, Oyo, Iwaa, and Apata.
He said the training was conducted in collaboration with the Industrial Training Fund.
In his response, the Training Manager at ITF, Kogi State, Abdulrahman Wudilawa, said the beneficiaries should consider themselves fortunate as solar technology is one of the most lucrative sectors of the Nigerian economy.
He said Nigeria has enough sunlight which is the major raw material for solar energy installation.
The ITF provided the training and certification for the beneficiaries.
Speaking on the advantages of solar energy, he said, “Solar energy generation produces no greenhouse gas emissions or air pollutants, significantly reducing the carbon footprint compared to traditional energy sources like coal or natural gas. It also helps combat climate change.”