Oil giant, TotalEnergies EP said it has achieved more than 94 per cent of local content.
The firm’s Executive Director on JV Assets, Mr Obi Imemba, stated that during a panel session on Tuesday on the sub-theme, Next Frontier for Nigerian Content: Divestment and Offshore Opportunities at the ongoing 13th Practical Nigerian Content Forum organised by the Nigerian Content Development and Monitoring Board in Yenagoa.
The conference has the theme: Deepening the Next Frontier for Nigerian Content Implementation.
Imemba noted, “We have achieved more than 94 per cent local content in terms of 100 per cent from engineering, installation, construction and installation among others and this was done during the COVID period. We were able to train a lot of welders, fitters, and technicians.
“One thing we are very proud of is our intentionality developing the capacity of our people from our communities. This is very cardinal for us in whatever we do. For every project, we identify people from the communities that we will give all levels of training.”
He also reaffirmed TotalEnergies’ commitment to renewable energy and sustainable development in the Niger Delta and Nigeria in all ramifications to contribute to the well-being of the people.
He stressed that the oil company was committed to the preservation of the region’s biodiversity as well as developing young talents.
Imemba acknowledged that climate change poses a global challenge, and the firm ensured that its activities did not harm the environment.
“There is a growing need for energy, so we will continue producing energy here, but we have to produce this energy sustainably. And when you talk about sustainability, there are many angles to it.
“When we talk about sustainability, some people just talk and think about climate. But the first pillar of sustainability is the people. And that is where capacity building comes up for those people that will be the anchor that will sustainably drive the production.
“For example, there is the knowledge gap we discovered about 25, 30 years ago regarding the people that are ready to work in the industry, whether it is shallow water, onshore or deep offshore. We used to go for recruitment campaigns in the US, Europe and all over the world trying to look for talent.
“But we became intentional in 2003 and established what we call the Institute of Petroleum Studies, Uniport which is a tripartite partnership between IFP School in Paris, Uniport and us (TotalEnergies). This school has been running for 21 years and they have produced more than 700 master’s degree holders.
“So, when they finish, we offer them a one-year internship within TotalEnergies offshore, onshore offices. And after that, there is a possibility of recruitment. A lot of them are recruited within TotalEnergies and outside,” he explained.
According to the TotalEnergies ED, the models are designed to address the needs of the industry, adding, “We updated the curriculum to include the main point of fighting climate change. So, we have called it the Institute of Petroleum and Energy Studies now to be able to incorporate new energies at the main point of the environmental concerns that are associated with fossil fuel production.”
He also lauded the NCDMB for deepening local content in the country.
